# Post at 18.46, on Tuesday 1 Feb 2011

[Tsukumogami](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tsukumogami "Pictures and
origins.") "('artifact spirit') are a type of Japanese spirit. ...
_tsukumogami originate from items or artifacts that have reached their 100th
birthday and thus become alive and aware._ Any object of this age, from swords
to toys, can become a tsukumogami. Tsukumogami are considered spirits and
supernatural beings, as opposed to enchanted items." (Thanks
[Tom!)](http://berglondon.com/studio/tom-armitage/ "Tom Armitage sent this to
the studio list.")

Also #1: "Tsukumogami vary radically in appearance, depending on the type of
item they originated from as well as the condition that item was in. Some,
such as tsukumogami originating from paper lanterns or broken sandals, can
have tears which become eyes and sharp teeth, thus giving a horrifying visage.
Others, such as worn prayer beads or teacups, may merely manifest faces and
appendages, giving a warm and friendly appearance." Related to this, see the
[dream parade from the movie
Paprika](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-0spB4OObrw "The music gets lodged in
my head.") [(more).](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9DX2rWe3XjU "There are
several parades.") _The mailbox and the refrigerator will lead the way![The
happy and mundane world will vent their
anger.](http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Paprika "Paprika quotes.")_

Also #2: "Though by and large tsukumogami are harmless and at most tend to
play occasional pranks on unsuspecting victims, as shown in the Otogiz≈çshi
they do have the capacity for anger and will band together to take revenge on
those who are wasteful or throw them away thoughtlessly." Related to this, the
Japanese water sprite [Kappa](<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kappa_(folklore)> "All the Wikipedia, all the time.") is a humanoid turtle that lives in ponds
and rivers, and leaps out to harass passers-by. If you are accosted by one,
remember that kappas are extremely polite, and insist that you bow before you
fight. On bowing, the kappa's brain (which is kept in an indentation on the
top of the head, and is made of water) will slosh out, and they will be
defeated.

I mention this because the kappa is also a prankster: "Their pranks range from
the relatively innocent, such as loudly passing gas or looking up women's
kimonos, to the more troublesome, such as drowning people and animals,
kidnapping children, and raping women." "Troublesome" is certainly the word
for it.

(Why does the kappa abduct people? For this: "the purpose of eating their
livers or their _shirikodama,_ a mythical ball inside the anus."

Remember that. _Shirikodama._ It will be useful one day.)

Also #3: "It is said that modern items cannot become tsukumogami; the reason
for this is that tsukumogami are said to be repelled by electricity.
Additionally, few modern items are used for the 100-year-span that it takes
for an artifact to gain a soul."

Related to this, see the [New Delhi Monkey
Man.](http://graylien.110mb.com/monkeyman.html "Modern urban myth.") In 2001,
[a monkey man terrorised India.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monkey-
man_of_Delhi "Tales spread far and wide.") It was stronger than a man; it had
metal claws; it was covered in thick hair with buttons on its chest. But the
monkey man was scared by water, light and electricity. Appearance of the
monkey caused mob terror... but turned the (at the time, rationed) electricity
back on would calm the neighbourhood. Monkey man was a modern, physical
manifestation of the desires of the group mentality.

I wonder what the lack of souls for modern objects signifies, to the group
mentality.

I finish on [Sokushinbutsu,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sokushinbutsu "Mental.") the rare Japanese practice of self-mummification by Buddhist monks:
"For 1,000 days (a little less than three years) the priests would eat a
special diet consisting only of nuts and seeds, while taking part in a regimen
of rigorous physical activity that stripped them of their body fat. They then
ate only bark and roots for another thousand days and began drinking a
poisonous tea made from the sap of the Urushi tree, normally used to lacquer
bowls."

And then: "This caused vomiting and a rapid loss of bodily fluids, and most
importantly, it made the body too poisonous to be eaten by maggots. Finally, a
self-mummifying monk would lock himself in a stone tomb barely larger than his
body, where he would not move from the lotus position. His only connection to
the outside world was an air tube and a bell. Each day he rang a bell to let
those outside know that he was still alive. When the bell stopped ringing, the
tube was removed and the tomb sealed. After the tomb was sealed, the other
monks in the temple would wait another 1,000 days, and open the tomb to see if
the mummification was successful."

Sometimes this would work. Usually, not.

_Dong!_
