# The Memex, the Manhatten Project, and the month of July 1945

In July 1945, Vannevar Bush came up with the
[Memex](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memex), a fictional proto-computer to
augment your memory, manage your research and contribute to knowledge of the
world. His article was published in _The Atlantic_ and [you can read it
online](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1945/07/as-we-may-
think/303881/) – although [this scanned
version](http://mnielsen.github.io/notes/kay/assets/bush_1945.pdf) also has
the ads and the illustrations, so check it out.

Anyway, for a made-up bit of furniture (it’s a desk with a microfilm library
inside), it has been enormously influential. Doug Engelbart, whose team kicked
off the personal computer vision in 1968: he read Bush’s article in a Red
Cross hut in the Phillipines in 1945/46, and it kickstarted his vision.
[Here’s the hut](https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/07/the-
hut-where-the-internet-began/277551/) (or at least one nearby).

Tim Berners-Lee, when he wrote [the proposal for what became the
web](https://www.w3.org/History/1989/proposal.html), in 1989: he cites Ted
Nelson’s vision of hypertext; Nelson [credits Bush as his main
influence](https://www.ibiblio.org/pioneers/bush.html).

[Vannevar Bush](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vannevar_Bush) (1890–1974)
headed up the US government’s military R&D during the Second World War,
coordinating thousands of scientists. Just _one_ of his projects was the [S-1
Section](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S-1_Executive_Committee), which showed
the feasibility of the atomic bomb, and he initiated the Manhattan Project,
the massive project that created the bomb itself.

So it isn’t hard to see the origin of his insights about exploring and
connecting knowledge.

But the Memex was still an achievement of the imagination: in 1945, computers
were mainly electromechanical calculating machines; the electronic computer
was brand new (ENIAC weighed 30 tons); programming a computer meant a days-
long process [rewiring a removable
plugboards](http://www.righto.com/2017/11/identifying-early-ibm-computer-
in.html). Computers that could be used _interactively_ were still several
years in the future. So the idea of a computer for personal use, let alone a
desk that you would work with by _drawing and speaking,_ in which you could
the hyperlinked knowledge of entire libraries - and your own correspondance
too - it’s a leap.

**Also in July 1945,** the same month as the publication of his speculative
article in _The Atlantic,_ and this is a coincidence, the [Trinity
test](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trinity_(nuclear_test)>): the first ever
detonation of a nuclear device, and the beginning of the grim culmination of
the atomic project.

RELATED: [A strange loop in time involving Doug Engelbart and Brian
Eno.](/home/2021/05/05/strange_loop)

These two legacies, the Memex and the Manhatten Project: which has had the
greater influence on the world?

Probably in the year of Bush’s death, 1974, still a decade before the first
popular personal computer, and at the height of the Cold War, Bush would have
seen the atomic bomb as his project which most altered the world. Perhaps now,
in 2021, it’s the Memex? I wonder.

I _know_ it’s only a coincidence, these two events in the same month, but it
invites the comparison. Could Bush’s perspective that led to the Memex have
even been formed without his exposure to the vast scale of cross-pollinating
scientific research, a context only possible in wartime?

My fear is that they’re two sides of the same coin, and that’s an ugly lesson.

My _hope_ is that what Bush had is something that _didn’t_ require war (and
what a war) to be formulated, which is a theory of human betterment and a
belief in human progress, and it’s that framework that guided his formative
speculations, and that at least is a method we can safely imitate.
