# 3 books from Chris Noessel

One of my favourite projects over the past few years has been **3 Books
Weekly** in which I asked friends and people I admire: _hey, so what three
books should I read this year?_

It was an email newsletter and [all 29 editions are archived
here](/home/tagged/3-books).

It’s a great question to ask. The three books aren’t supposed to be your
desert island books. Or the showing-off books that tell everyone how clever
you are. A good strategy is to have a conversation that gets you somewhere
interesting, and then take the question literally… so, what three books should
I read to learn more about this?

What happens is you get (a) a good reading list and, mainly (b), to see what
makes them tick.

All of which is to say: it’s time to bring it back. Not weekly. But, you know,
as an infrequent format. Let’s see what happens.

So [Chris Noessel](https://twitter.com/chrisnoessel) \- among many other
things - is behind the blog [Sci-Fi Interfaces](https://scifiinterfaces.com)
which digs into the interaction design of computer interfaces in movies.

FILE UNDER: **artificial intelligence, narrative design fiction, networked
matter, architecture.**

**Hey, Chris. What keeps you busy?**

Certainly ramping up to be a daycare and homeschooler during the pandemic has
been a challenge, especially considering that my day job of designing an AI
assistant for Supply Chains at IBM has also ramped up in importance and
workload as well. With the time that’s left, I’m still doing my damndest to
keep a post coming every two weeks for the
[scifiinterfaces.com](https://scifiinterfaces.com) blog, working on new books,
and even trying my hand at short fiction. It is a busy, busy time.

Read on for Chris’ three books…

I’ve been thinking about genies/djinni as metaphors for artificial
intelligence for a while, searching out mythologies and modern re-imaginings
as a springboard. One such search led me to the collection “The Djinn Falls in
Love.” There are many cool tales within, but I particularly recommend the
soaring poetic language skills of Maria Dahvana Headley, whose short story
“Black Powder” is my favorite in the collection.

The Djinn Falls in Love: [Google
Books](https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_Djinn_Falls_in_Love_and_Other_Storie.html?id=BSXwDQAAQBAJ&redir_esc=y)

Over the past several years I’ve been interested in sci-fi that has been
commissioned to address issues (rather than relying on the interests of the
author or of the entertainment value of the topic). The subgenre is kind of
design fiction, but clearly narrative in nature. Maybe we can call it
**commfic?** Anyway, one of my favorite of these collections is the Institute
for the Future’s “An Aura of Familiarity.” Such beloved authors: Doctorow!
Rucker! Ashby! Sterling! And such a rich topic: Networked matter. Madeline
Ashby’s “Social Services,” in particular, has stayed with me since I read it
in 2013.

An Aura of Familiarity: Visions from the Coming Age of Networked Matter:
[Institute for the
Future](https://www.iftf.org/fileadmin/user_upload/downloads/th/IFTF_SR-1590C__AnAuraOfFamiliarity.pdf)
(pdf)

I know a lot of people **know** about Christopher Alexander’s pattern
language, but I don’t know that many people who have read it. And I don’t mean
“The Timeless Way of Building,” where they introduce the philosophy and the
ideas, or “The Oregon Experiment,” where they share how the language played
out in a design project, but actually “A Pattern Language” itself: pattern to
pattern, cover to cover. When I did, it opened my eyes to architecture of
course, but more importantly, how to think systemically about complex design
systems across scales, how to manifest these thoughts to clarify your own
thinking, and how to document them so they are usable within a community of
practice. None of the laudable attempts to formalize a pattern language for
interaction design have “made it big,” but I still think it’s the best way to
think about design practice, and this is the source material. I recommend
every designer read it.

A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction, Christopher Alexander:
[Google
Books](https://books.google.com/books/about/A_Pattern_Language.html?id=hwAHmktpk5IC)

Genies! Thank you Chris :)

Tom Stafford and I wrote [Mind Hacks](https://mindhacks.com/book/) together,
back in the day. _(Boasting moment: Mind Hacks ended up getting translated
into Japanese, Korean, Greek, Polish, Italian, and Finnish, which still
astounds me. Hey, well done us!)_

I’ve been reading his newsletter, **Reasonable People,** which is all about
the psychology of persuasion and rational argument. [Subscribe/read it
here.](https://tomstafford.substack.com) And I feel this topic is super
relevant rn given the polarisation of opinion on many axes in society, and the
paradox that

Which means I feel like I understand nothing, so I want to learn more.

What I did is ask Tom for a reading list: **3 books to give me a grounding in
the psychology of persuasion.**

I’ll ask him to introduce himself first…

**Hey Tom, tell us what you do?**

I work as a [lecturer in psychology and cognitive
science](http://tomstafford.staff.shef.ac.uk) at the University of Sheffield.
That mostly means I teach and research the basic mechanisms of learning and
decision making, using experiments or analysing large observational data sets.
I’ve got a side gig in trying to write about how psychology works, as a
discipline, for a general audience. Recently I’ve been writing about the
science of persuasion, argument and rationality for [my
newsletter](https://tomstafford.substack.com).

Find Tom on Twitter as [@tomstafford](https://twitter.com/tomstafford).

Read on for his three books…

There’s a tendency in psychology research to emphasise the quirks – the
extraneous or small factors which influence us when they shouldn’t. I had an
epiphany when I realised that the engine of this type of research is actually
baked into the model of science which we follow: hold everything constant
except one factor, run experiments to test how variation of that factor
affects the outcome. For experiments on persuasion this means making the
effect of rational argument - which is the same in all experimental conditions

- invisible, and highlighting the effect of non-rational factors. This book is
  a great example of where that whole programme of research can lead you.

Influence: Science and Practice: [Google
Books](https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Influence.html?id=5dfv0HJ1TEoC&printsec=frontcover&source=kp_read_button&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false)
/ [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Influence:_Science_and_Practice)

A counter-blast to the tradition in psychology which de-emphasises
rationality. Includes an intoxicating account of how reason, once established,
has its own internal dynamic – ideas generate new ideas; we’re driven to some
conclusions regardless of what we originally intended or wanted. We adopt
reason as a tool but, Singer argues, “Reason is no mere slave”.

The Expanding Circle: [Google
Books](https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_Expanding_Circle.html?id=Yve7lgvtLcsC&printsec=frontcover&source=kp_read_button&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false)
/ [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Expanding_Circle)

This is the book which really started me on my current trip thinking about
rationality. It is an apex example of how you do philosophy incorporating
insights from evolution and experimental psychology, and it triggered a
gestalt switch in how I thought about reasoning. Reading it made me realise
how I’d been following the tradition in psychology which emphasised irrational
factors over the rational, and which pushed the view that these quirks, biases
and limitations are an overwhelming problem for our self-image as rational
individuals. Mercier & Sperber don’t argue these irrational factors away, they
show that there’s another, better, way of looking at them, one which considers
reason as a property of interactions between individuals. Not only does this
give you a whole, new, and productive, way of looking at the old evidence, it
also create more space for optimism about our human capacity reasonableness.

The Enigma of Reason: A New Theory of Human Understanding: [Google
Books](https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_Enigma_of_Reason.html?id=akxmDQAAQBAJ&printsec=frontcover&source=kp_read_button&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false)

Can I just say that I am in love with the term "gestalt switch."

Cheers Tom!
