# Post at 07.50, on Tuesday 18 Sep 2007

A bunch of texts about computing:

My friend [David Smith](http://www.preoccupations.org/) has ferried to me a
first edition of [Ted Nelson](http://www.xu.com/ted/)'s [Computer Lib/Dream
Machines](http://www.digibarn.com/collections/books/computer-lib/) (1974).
This is extremely good. Computer Lib established the computer as something
with which people could be creative; something with which people could create
art (oh, and make their lives better).

I also have [Doug Engelbart](http://www.ibiblio.org/pioneers/engelbart.html)'s
[Mother of All
Demos](http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=-8734787622017763097) (1968) on
DVD. He had it at a conference I was at, and was copying it for a friend... I
was nearby and happened to have a DVD burner... I asked if I could snag a
copy. It's pretty good quality; I'm very pleased.

Both Engelbart and Nelson read Vannevar Bush's 1945 essay in the Atlantic
Monthly, [As We May Think](http://www.theatlantic.com/doc/194507/bush). Now
that'd be an issue to own. Bush put the US scientists on a war footing, and in
this article gave something back in the form of the
[memex](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memex): a kind of hypertext, knowledge-
management device for linking and sharing articles and pictures, based on
[microfiche and cameras](http://www.kerryr.net/pioneers/gallery/ns_bush8.htm).
Engelbart read this article [as a radar technician in the
Philippines](http://www.pbs.org/opb/nerds2.0.1/networking_nerds/radar.html),
put the ideas together with the radar screen he used, and realised that
computers didn't need to be used just as calculators to figure out ballistics
--they could be used as personal helpers, in collaboration with people in an
interactive way. The 1968 demo included co-working, hypertext, links,
outlines, cursors, video conferencing, and the mouse.

Another book I have is [Lion's Commentary on Unix 6th
Edition](http://www.ercb.com/feature/feature.0067.html) (1996 reprint). It
circulated illegally for some time, only being published 20 years after it was
written. The whole operating system is short - less than 9,000 lines - and it
rewards reading. Want to know what a process is? [Here you
go.](http://interconnected.org/home/2005/09/24/what_is_a_process) And a file?
It's in there. Magical.

And so three questions:

Recommendations?
