# Post at 16.12, on Sunday 9 Jan 2011

[Marcel Mauss on
magic:](<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magic_(paranormal)#Marcel_Mauss> "Mauss
wrote a General Theory of Magic.") "In practice, magic differs from religion
in desired outcome. Religion seeks to satisfy moral and metaphysical ends,
while magic is a functional art which often seeks to accomplish tangible
results. In this respect magic resembles technology and science. Belief in
each is diffuse, universal, and removed from the origin of the practice. Yet,
the similarity between these social phenomena is limited, as science is based
in experimentation and development, while magic is an "a priori belief." Mauss
concludes that though magical beliefs and rites are most analogous to
religion, magic remains a social phenomenon distinct from religion and science
with its own characteristic rules, acts and aims."

[Mauss](http://mhsteger.tumblr.com/post/588627611/marcel-mauss-
born-10-may-1872-died-1-february "Cracking photo of Mauss from the 1930s, with
quotes from The Gift, the research for which is he best known.") provides, in
[A General Theory of
Magic,](http://books.google.com/books?id=T7TgmEpJYcAC&lpg=PP1&ots=nEj9xKJdgl&dq=marcel.mauss%20magic&pg=PP1#v=onepage&q&f=false "Google Books page") a look and explanation of the rituals, actors, and lines
of power _(mana)_ involved, and magic's place as a collective phenomenon. I
find myself particularly attracted to the systems of representation: there is
a persistent relationship between a murderer and their victim, for example;
there is a spooky action-at-a-distance between a flame and a fire; there are
laws of similarity and so on.

There seems to be something really human about these magical associations,
something that I share. Like: a stolen object carries bad luck. Or: an object
dropped into a clean toilet (to be crude about things!) will always be dirty,
dirtier even then a piece of food dropped onto an uncleaned kitchen floor. Or,
try this: draw a picture of a friend, then burn the paper. It's difficult to
do so, the paper has become sacred.

There are words that Mauss has picked up used to talk about these magical
qualities and lines of power. Words like _mana_ and _orenda._ The cultures in
which these words are used understand the concepts completely. There are
proscribed ways that _mana_ flows and accumulates, the forms it can take, and
the ways in which it interacts.

_Mana_ is as abstract and real as _momentum,_ _kinetic energy,_ and _magnetic
flux density._ These terms from physics aren't important because they let us
make predictions about the behaviour of the universe (that's the job of
technology), but because they reveal the structure of the universe we inhabit.
We observe first and do not judge, and that's science, that's how the deep
structure is revealed. Physicists are bloodhounds; Newton's Laws and all the
rest are hidden lines of scent. And as with physics, so with magic. _Mana_ is
a thing to be observed, felt, not judged -- and then the hidden currents of
humans and our place in the universe can be seen. The rich possibility of it
all makes me giddy!
