# A month long conference is a neat concept

As a follow-up to last week’s post [Rethinking conference talks for video
calls](/home/2020/05/15/video_talks), here are a couple of ideas that caught
my eye.

Neuroscientist Daniel Glaser is [getting his audience to
wave](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/waving-fast-slow-new-trick-audience-
participation-online-glaser/):

ask a question and then get them to wave fast for ‘yes’ and slow for ‘no’

This is very clever:

I had the call set for gallery view and was immediately faced with a matrix of
waving hands. I could tell straight off that more or less everyone was
responding. More pleasingly I could also see without counting that around
three quarters were waving fast for ‘yes’. The proportion of fast and slow
waving produces a moving texture. **Your visual system processes the whole
image without your having to search it or count out and you can read out the
collective answer straight away.**

I talked in the post linked at the top about the important of audience
participation – for my own well-being more than anything else. So I’m going to
nick this.

**Web Directions** has long been in my list of favourite events, so it’s no
surprise to see co-founder John Allsopp make a thoughtful post about [the
underlying purpose of conferences](https://www.webdirections.org/blog/the-
future-of-web-directions-part-i-the-shape-of-online-conferences/) – and then
re-invent the format for their next events.

**Presentations will be pre-recorded.** Honestly this wouldn’t appeal to me,
except that…

Meanwhile speakers can even interact with the audience, or add more value to
their presentation, **while it is actually taking place** – perhaps clarifying
a point in response to a (text based) question, providing links for further
reading, and so on.

And that’s an intriguing idea, the speaker being in two places at one,
simultaneously on stage, and also glossing and feeding the conversation. We’re
multi-tasking animals, so embrace that. I love this.

They’re **moving on from the standard two day conference format.** Get this:

Instead of expecting people to take two whole days out of their most likely
much more unsettled than normal schedule and spend yet another 12 hours
staring at the screen over consecutive days, **our online conference program
will take place weekly, across a whole month,** with sessions approximately 3
and a half hours each week on a Friday.

Back in 2015, I wrote about [the best event I ever
attended](/home/2015/02/06/events) which "ran across three successive Fridays
in 2004. Each started at 2.30pm" and ran the rest of the day.

What I found was that

There was something about the weekly rhythm which meant that there was time
for me to digest each download of new thoughts. The session stayed with me for
the week. … A week is time to discuss with friends, contemplate, see the
deeper patterns.

So I’ll be watching Web Direction’s experiences with long conferences with
interest. I think they’re onto something.
