# 2021 is when lockdown will stop mattering

Over lockdown, one concept that has stuck in my head is short and long-term
adjustments. (Here in the UK, we’ve been in one form of lockdown or another
since mid March. With the new variant, that’s not ending any time soon.)

It’s from a post applying ideas from economics to epidemiology:

**long-run elasticities of adjustment are more powerful than short-run
elasticities.** In the short run you socially distance, but in the long run
you learn which methods of social distance protect you the most. Or you move
from doing “half home delivery of food” to “full home delivery of food” once
you get that extra credit card or learn the best sites.

Personally: Short-term adjustments mean working from my sofa using Zoom, and
pausing the usual round of coffees and chatting (that’s how I find new ideas
and also new work).

Long-term means moving the house around and setting up a desk; sorting out the
lighting; opening my calendar on Wednesdays for [Unoffice
Hours](/home/2020/09/24/unoffice_hours)… but also domestic things like using
the time freed up from the commute to get into baking. All to the point that
if somehow I could magically go back to the old way, I’m not sure I would.

You can see this happening with restaurants. Short-term means staff are
furloughed and orders go to pick-up only. Long-term: well, we’re beginning to
see hints of it. Yes, some restaurants are closing, but others are offering
part-cooked meals for delivery and building a customer base that way, amazing
food that you could never get at home before.

We’ll be in lockdown deep into next year. Even then, how long will it take
before we stop wearing masks, or no longer require negative covid tests before
flying?

The long-term adjustments will kick in way before then.

What I wonder about mundane business activities.

I can imagine that something like, say, the employee onboarding process has
been ad hoc, time consuming, and error prone for the last few months. But in
2021, someone in HR will get round to making it streamlined and efficient –
totally optimised for remote working.

At which point, will there ever be an incentive to switch back?

Here’s how I think about it. First you **cope** and then you **adapt.** The
kicker: once you adapt, you may not want to go back.

We’ll get a PS5 with the cash we save from not going to the pub, and set up a
sweet home office instead of commuting, and organise home deliveries instead
of a weekend visit to the supermarket.

And then we’ll realise that we have a new group of friends on PlayStation, and
working from home means that we’ve gotten to know the folks in the local
takeaway for lunch, and grocery deliveries means we have time for a run on
Sundays instead.

Maybe my phone gets good at automatically monitoring [my social distancing
budget](/home/2020/09/01/microcovids), better than counting steps or calories
even, and it turns out that, with this new lifestyle, I have more than enough
for friends and family.

And gradually lockdown stops impeding any of the activities we actually want
to do, and even if it ends, we wouldn’t go back.

Lockdown will end not because the restrictions lift, but because they stop
mattering.

So I think 2021 is the year that long-term adjustments really gather pace, and
it’ll be interesting to see, personally and for the economy at large, what
that means. How will travelling change? What kinds of new companies will
thrive? Like I said in May, [there is no After](/home/2020/05/06/lockdown).
