# Revisiting Adaptive Design, a lost design movement

I was reminded today of [Dan Hill](https://medium.com/@cityofsound)’s work in
the early 2000s on **Adaptive Design** – and it feels to me like this
movement, focused on re-use, modularity, and unintended customisation, is one
worth revisiting, almost 20 years on.

I’ll cover some history and then talk about why this matters.

_One caveat: I was there but I can’t remember the references. Were there great
introductory essays and brilliant reading lists, still relevant today? I don’t
know. So I’m starting my archeology here._

Adaptive Design was where I first heard of the book [How Buildings Learn: What
Happens After They’re
Built](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/How_Buildings_Learn) by Stewart Brand
(1994). It’s here that Brand introduces his “Shearing Layers” [(here’s his
diagram)](http://berglondon.com/talks/people/?slide=7) which summarise the **6
layers** of a building, and their different rates of change.

Site – geographical setting, eternal.

Structure – foundation and load bearing elements, 30-300 years.

Skin – 20ish years.

Services – 7-15 years.

Space plan – interior layout, from three (commercial) to 30 (domestic) years.

Stuff – furniture and belongings.

_(The above taken from[Phil Gyford’s notes on How Buildings
Learn](https://www.gyford.com/phil/writing/2004/10/24/how-buildings-le/).)_

Relevance to design? The architect creates the building up to the _Space
plan;_ the occupier adds their _Stuff._ But the occupier can also change the
house, with some work, by changing the Space – knocking down interior walls
and so on.

Critically, part to job of the architect is to design the _Services_ (the
electricity conduits, the water, the windows for light) **to accommodate
changes to the Space.** The architect creates a platform for adaptation.

**Concretely,** take Levittown.

[Levittown, New York](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Levittown,_New_York)
(built 1947-1951) kickstarted American suburbia. And, um, refused to sell
houses to people of colour…

The homes _(there were four models)_ were built factory-style, on an assembly
line.

And they were built for adaptation:

The houses were built _unfinished._ They had space on the side to build a
garage. The ground floor was the only one delivered finished. There was
_space_ for a first floor, but it was left as an attic, and the stairs were
incomplete and ran up to a blank wall.

(Quoting one of my own old presentations there.)

So the house can be extended. But, from an Adaptive Design perspective, the
key is that house _has the affordance_ of being extendable.

What does “affordance” mean? It means that the design visibly shows what is
possible. Affordance is originally a term from biology and animal cognition,
and it made its way into being design jargon.

As the house owner, you’d sit in your front room and notice that blank wall.
It would give you the idea that extending into the attic was possible, even if
you’d never have thought of it yourself. The blank wall would remind you,
would _entice_ you.

The leap that Hill made with Adaptive Design was to talk about physical and
digital in the same breath.

The early 2000s was the era of websites with APIs _(an API is a way to
automatically control a website with code, instead of doing it by hand)._ The
photosharing website Flickr launched [their
API](https://www.flickr.com/services/developer) in 2004, which meant it could
be adapted to all kinds of unexpected uses.

For example: The Royal Observatory, Greenwich, [used the API
to](https://www.archimuse.com/mw2010/papers/romeo/romeo.html) "integrate the
Flickr group with the museum’s Web site, develop a sophisticated competition
administration tool, and produce interactive exhibits."

The web was made for Adaptive Design: from View Source (so people could learn
how to make their own websites), to [web
feeds](/home/2020/08/12/introducing_aboutfeeds) and APIs – websites could be
pulled apart and recombined, _and that was encouraged._

And there’s a dilemma with software, definitely. Would you prefer the 100%
ideal to-do list user experience of a custom-made app, but you can’t copy-and-
paste your lists anyway, or a powerful but often janky hacked-together Excel
spreadsheet? Over the last 20 years, collectively, we opted for the former.

How to enable not users but _adaptors?_ How can people move from using a
product, to understanding how it hangs together and making their own changes?
How do you design products with, metaphorically, screws not nails?

How can our apps, our cameras, our furniture, our cars, and our home gadgets
be less like closed-box appliances, and more like Levittown houses – allowing
and even encouraging end user adaptation?

**This is a must-read essay by Dan Hill, introducing Adaptive Design:[Insanely
great, or just good
enough?](https://www.cityofsound.com/blog/2004/02/insanely_great_.html)**
Originally published in _Core77_ in 2004, it’s a critique of the unadaptable,
glued-closed Apple iPod and its non-user-replaceable battery.

Hill quotes Brian Eno:

An important aspect of design is the degree to which the object involves you
in its own completion. Some work invites you into itself by not offering a
finished, glossy, one-reading-only surface. This is what makes old buildings
interesting to me.

Also check out:

Me? I got into the idea that hardware products could be adaptable too. [What
if cameras and photocopiers had hackable hardware
APIs?](http://berglondon.com/blog/2006/11/27/widgets-widgets-everywhere/) We
even built a [radio for the BBC with a hardware
API](http://berglondon.com/projects/olinda/).

Adaptive Design developed language around modularity, layers, rough edges, and
widgets. It went from architecture to APIs, via affordances and co-creation.

We’re in an era of **No User-Serviceable Parts Inside.**

And so it’s a challenging and provocative question to ask of _any product
design_ right now:

Looking around me right now, I have Sonos speakers in three rooms in the
house. In my _imagined 2020,_ the BBC would produce a podcast feed of 2 minute
radio news bulletins, updated on the hour. I would write a short script to
grab that podcast, and send the latest bulletin to the speakers, interrupting
whatever is currently playing.

I’d be able to write an app for my TV as simply as writing a webpage. It would
be an example of [personal software](/home/2020/06/18/personal_software) and
take over “Standby” mode for me and my family, wherever we are in the world,
providing one-click to FaceTime whenever we’re online at the same time.

I want to take a photo of my bookshelves, OCR it, and link every book to
Amazon’s “Search Inside” functionality because - in my imaginary 2020 - they
have an open API for book ISBNs. All in a couple lines of code.

I want my house to come with a _wiki_ that I write on, and my electricity
meter writes on too, and that my front door lock consults for a list of people
who are allowed in. I recently touched on [why the smart home
failed](/home/2020/05/26/voice) for strategic reasons: "every big tech company
wants to ‘own’ voice interactions, and be a gatekeeper to all smart devices."
The smart home failed because it ignored the lessons of Adaptive Design.

That early work on Adaptive Design has already done the hard digging of
finding reference points and developing frameworks to guide product design for
adaptation - it’s the anti Apple, the anti Amazon, the anti DRM. I’d love to
see designers share their ideas for future adaptable iPhones and adaptable
apps, expanding the discourse, and pushing back on the status quo. Adaptive
Design is a movement worth reviving in 2020.

**Update 1 Sept.**

Hill’s 2006 essay [Architecture and interaction design, via adaptation and
hackability](https://medium.com/a-chair-in-a-room/architecture-and-
interaction-design-via-adaptation-and-hackability-a51204564a1d) is a great
standalone piece, and has a _ton_ of takeaways about what Adaptive Design
means as a concrete approach _(rather than just saying “hey, here’s a
perspective” which is what my post does above)._

For me, I’ve found it helpful to think about different interactions with a
product almost as different “modes” – for instance, with the web browser,
there’s regular browsing and also the developer mode. Then Hill’s
architectural terms, highlighted in this essay, come into play: “threshold”
(how does a user consciously move between models); wayfinding (how are routes
between modes signposted); screens (to mask depth).

This kind of thinking makes a product powerful and adaptable, but also not
overwhelming.

And so on.
