# Speculative ad formats for the post-newsfeed world

So I was on a call recently, talking about people abandoning the global
timelines like Twitter and Facebook, and instead hunkering down in private
Dunbar-number-scale virtual neighbourhoods, such as Discord servers etc, [as
discussed last week](/home/2021/01/07/dunbar_spaces).

And, on this call, because of the fact that these virtual private
neighbourhoods don’t collect personal data, and therefore can’t target ads, I
mentioned something like: _well advertising will have to change._

And they said, _how?_

And because I’ve been thinking about this for a little while, and because
while I like advertising (generally speaking it’s a straight-up way to find
out about new things), the capability of microtargeting is a societal risk
like having [water pipes made out of
lead](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lead%E2%80%93crime_hypothesis), I had in
mind a few speculative alternatives.

All of which is to say: here are three quick ideas about at-scale advertising
into zero personal data private communities.

In the old days, adverts would target publications by interest and
demographic.

Today, newsletters and podcasts are both growing: A [fat
middle](/home/2013/05/09/orbits_and_hardware) of ongoing publications around
specific interests and personalities, building audiences – engaged audiences
who are demonstrably investing time (podcasts) and money (Substack
newsletters) in continuing their engagement.

So who is building the ad machine to target these communities en masse?

At the moment, if I want to spend $100k advertising on Facebook, I can. But
how can I, at scale, choose a collection of communities to advertise into,
with enough volume and diversity that it’s possible to run auto-optimising
algorithms?

Could each publication submit a gestalt view of their audience (demographics,
interest, readiness to purchase, etc), and targeting is a matter of choosing
the right _collection_ of audiences, but not targeting _within_ the audiences?

While it’s not desirable (or even possible) to collect data on individual
clickthrough, maybe there’s a startup in collecting data on conversion stats
for different communities?

What’s the [Audit Bureau of
Circulations](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audit_Bureau_of_Circulations_(UK)>)
of pro-am online media?

The traditional way ads work is that you find a place where people are hanging
out, with a relevant sentiment, and you place a message next to it.

Adjacency works well on a newsfeed: you get people in the mood to respond and
tap and act, then you put an ad in the way and… people respond and tap and
act.

But if everyone is spending their time in private Slack channels, or private
Discord servers, not scrolling but _actually socialising,_ then what does
adjacency look like?

For me, the answer is that people will be hanging out in _multiple_ spaces.
That’s another difference when the global timelines go away. It’s not 100%
Facebook, it’s ~10% each in a dozen different spaces.

So the future will include a variety of

Imagine [MakeSpace](https://makespace.fun) teams up with **Tate Modern** to
make a persistent museum space with art to experience, explore, and learn
about. People will visit that space and hang out with their friends – why not?
It’s more fun to chat when there’s stuff around you to look at and play with,
and you might run into people too.

_c.f.[Monterey Aquarium sets up shop in Animal
Crossing](https://www.polygon.com/2020/4/13/21218993/animal-crossing-new-
horizons-real-museum-curation-tour)._

Or there are ephemeral spaces that pull huge crowds. There are temporary
spaces that people travel to, e.g. [in-game
concerts](https://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/2020-06-10-are-video-games-
the-future-of-live-music). _(Simply streaming concerts doesn’t count. You have
to have the social space otherwise there’s no interaction adjacency going
on.)_

So what are the billboards for virtual spaces, and how do you price them?

There’s [Bidstack](https://www.bidstack.com) in this space, which I am super
into as a concept. They allow advertisers to buy spots in-game: "trackside
banners, cityscape billboards, pitchside LED boards and other native spaces
within the virtual world."

But virtual billboards in virtual events are a blunt instrument.

Think of the real world. Where are the in-game stands doing giveaways, the
leaflets, the limited edition t-shirts, etc. There can be equivalents of all
of these.

The scenario is this: everyone spends their time in private Slack groups and
private Discord servers. There’s no data collected, and no ads. How am I, as a
business, supposed to let people know about my new shop, or sell these new
shoes, or get people only my subscription fashion business, or drive signups
for my new video tool, and so on.

The answer is that you go door-to-door.

We have the equivalent of door-to-door sales in social media already:
influencers. Somebody has an expertise, and an audience, and they plug product
in their feed for money.

But instead of 1 or 2, or even a half dozen, how can a brand have 100,000
influencers?

Look, people _love_ to be associated with the brands they love.

Instead of making influencers endorse brands on their public feed, and turning
them into media, treat them as ambassadors. Have a scheme where people can
sign up to get (say) advance versions of unique Heinz drops - I _guarantee_
there will be people who are into exclusive flavours of spaghetti in a can, of
all walks of life - and maybe a discount, and all they have to do is ensure
that a certain number of people from their allotted community Discords tap on
a certain link.

The cost around this is prohibitive right now, which is why it can’t happen,
and you would need a way to prove that certain clicks came from certain
communities – even if you didn’t know the individual who clicked through.

But, with work, I bet you could industrialise the process, and appropriate the
language of _ambassadors_ and _drops_ from high margin brands, making it
available as a standard marketing product.

(Anyone who grew up in bars in the 90s will remember encountering “cigarette
girls.” [Here’s a write-up from someone who did the
job.](https://blogs.bmj.com/tc/2013/08/26/i-was-a-late-90s-cigarette-girl/) I
hadn’t remembered cigarette girls until just now. Blimey, let’s not do that
again.)

_BONUS: Industrialised influencers who are bots. Chatbots are getting pretty
good. I read about someone recently who had configured a chatbot to act a bit
like his long-distance girlfriend, and was way more into the bot. So alongside
the ambassadors program, I would suggest making chatbots that can be added to
these private social spaces, and while they flirt and socialise and tell
jokes, they also every so often suggest stuff to buy._

You fish where the fish are.

As a business - an advertiser - there is an upcoming need to reach people in
spaces that currently do not allow for gathering personal data, targeting ads,
or collecting conversion metrics.

Maybe tools to collect said data can be built. But that would be very much
against the tide of GDPR and consumer sentiment.

Instead: let’s think about how to advertise with the minimum of data, not the
maximum.

There are a bunch of startups embedded in the notes above and, although this
is unlikely, maybe one of them has a path to a format like the banner ad, or a
clever sales model like AdSense.

But if I were an established online ad broker, I would be working wildly to
figure this out now, because otherwise one of those startups might get there
first.
