# My personal AI research agenda, mid 2024 (and a pitch for work)

I want to show you some new work around AI agents.

Then I want to summarise my current interests, and pitch you on a project.

First, a pointer to an AI agent paper I put out this week:

**[Lares smart home assistant: A toy AI agent demonstrating emergent
behavior](/more/2024/lares/)** – see videos demos, get the code, and read my
observations and speculations.

_I define an agent as an AI system that (a) uses tools, and (b) has autonomy
on how to reach its goal and when to halt._

You may remember that last year I built a proof of concept for an AI-powered
smart home assistant. Award winning! [Watch the Lares v1 video
here](https://www.actsnotfacts.com/made/lares) (and the [technical write-
up](/home/2023/04/26/lares)).

It demonstrated problem solving, which is wild. Like, if you ask it to look in
a room for you, it’ll figure out it needs to turn the lights on first.

Well, as a proof of concept it wasn’t very reliable.

The version linked in the paper is super reliable. _You can download and run
the code for yourself._

What’s wilder than the emergent problem solving abilities is how _simple_ it
is. You need very little code to get really sophisticated emergent behaviour.

It’s a technical write-up.

But the [observations and speculations](/more/2024/lares/#speculations)
section goes further:

_A meta point: I like building toy prototypes because it puts me in touch with
the tech in a way that talking and thinking never do. And new thoughts come!_

So do check that out and share it round. Some light reading for your weekend
haha

If I were putting down a personal research agenda for AI, here in the middle
of 2024, these are the areas I find most fascinating:

Like, if I had the opportunity to really zoom in, building in these places is
where I would spend my time. They’re all connected.

I think something they have in common is that they’re all very human (human
scale and in the human world) and they’re all very simple (but with
emergence). I can’t quite put into words what I think will happen with
concerted work in this domain but… something unique.

They all share this intriguing combination of the utterly pragmatic and also
brand new techniques only just being researched by the AI companies.

I’m looking for my next really chewy projects for my product invention micro-
studio.

I would love to find projects in the domain above, ambitious enough that I
could pull together a small team for a 3+ month sprint, ideally with public
outcomes.

_My experience is that, by building focused prototypes with tangible outputs,
you invent new products, expose really interesting interaction design
challenges, and also drive the technical research agenda._

But maybe it’s not a regular client project, maybe there are other ways of
working on this kind of stuff, or maybe I should bite the bullet and start
something new.

I’m open minded. Get in touch.
