# What if A.I. gets 100x better in a matter of months?

I posted the other day about [the current artificial intelligence cutting edge
GPT-3](/home/2020/08/10/the_church_of_the_next_word), and its ability to write
like a human. But since running across the following article, the idea of an
**A.I. overhang** has been stuck in my head: what if artificial intelligences
could get 100-1,000x more competent in a matter of only months?

An _overhang_ is when you have had the ability to build transformative AI for
quite some time, but you haven’t because no-one’s realised it’s possible. Then
someone does and surprise! It’s a lot more capable than everyone expected.

I am worried we’re in an overhang right now. I think we right now have the
ability to build an orders-of-magnitude more powerful system than we already
have, and I think GPT-3 is the trigger for 100x larger projects at Google,
Facebook and the like, with timelines measured in months.

There are numbers in [the
post](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/N6vZEnCn6A95Xn39p/are-we-in-an-ai-
overhang), but the argument goes that a 100x more effective A.I. will cost in
the range of only $1bn, which is a relatively small fraction of Big Tech R&D.

Intel’s expected 2020 revenue is $73bn. What if they could train a $1bn A.I.
to design computer chips that are 100x faster per watt-dollar? _(And then use
those chips to train an even better A.I…)_

At what point do self-driving cars effectively become _solved…_ and what if it
was in only 6 months? All the control couplings and sensors are there, we’re
just waiting for the artificial brain.

British call centres employ 1.3 million people, [4% of the UK
workforce](https://www.thisismoney.co.uk/money/news/article-8478819/Call-
centres-report-huge-surge-interactions-creating-hundreds-jobs.html). What if
they’re 99% out of work by 2022?

What if text/voice/video synthesis and _persuasion_ becomes a solved game,
such that anyone can be scammed or hacked over email or phone or Zoom with
off-the-shelf software, in the hands of anyone that buys it, robocalling a
thousand people per hour? What if a covert, 95% accurate lie detector can run
on a smartphone with a commodity camera and commodity mic, ship in 6 months,
and cost a dollar?

What’s interesting/startling/threatening about the idea of an _overhang_ is
that the changes come from every direction and there’s no time to adjust. The
logic means that - if true - it’s not preventable. Sure, new professions will
emerge, and new creative opportunities, and new social norms. But in the
meantime?
