# Post at 21.20, on Saturday 8 Jan 2011

[The AI Revolution is
On,](http://www.wired.com/magazine/2010/12/ff_ai_essay_airevolution/ "What
I've been calling 'fractional AI'") by Steven Levy at Wired: "The Kiva bots
may not seem very smart. They don’t possess anything like human intelligence
and certainly couldn’t pass a Turing test. But they represent a new forefront
in the field of artificial intelligence. Today’s AI doesn’t try to re-create
the brain. Instead, it uses machine learning, massive data sets, sophisticated
sensors, and clever algorithms to master discrete tasks. Examples can be found
everywhere: The Google global machine uses AI to interpret cryptic human
queries. Credit card companies use it to track fraud. Netflix uses it to
recommend movies to subscribers. And the financial system uses it to handle
billions of trades (with only the occasional meltdown)."

Levy's point is that old school AI - human-equivalent computer intelligences -
has been replaced by a new kind of AI: one that doesn't try to replicate the
human mind. Lots of examples in his article.

_Fractional AI_

I've been calling this "fractional AI," a kind of domesticated, not-very-
intelligent artificial intelligence, and you can find it in toys and in the
algorithms in the tools that we use everyday. What I find interesting is that
it's no longer high-end. Just as, in the early 1900s, the fractional
horsepower engine took the power of factories into every home, and led to the
washing machine, the hairdryer, the dishwasher -- fractional AI will put
intelligence in our everyday products. And what then?

I've touched on the topic a couple of times in two very similar talks
recently:

...but I'm not yet happy with how I'm stating the trend, or its opportunities.
I have another talk in a month that I'm going to use for a deeper exploration,
and that's the one I'll publish more widely.
