# Raw thoughts on Amazon Dash

Amazon Dash… yup, makes sense. Give away light-weight Internet of Things
gadgets to encourage purchase of fast-moving consumer goods. [Tiny plastic
buttons that allow for instant product
ordering](http://www.theverge.com/2015/3/31/8316775/amazon-dash-buttons-turn-
homes-into-shopping-carts): "Your entire house is now a shopping cart."

We worked on a bunch of similar stuff at Berg – such as
[Cloudwash](http://bergcloud.com/case-studies/cloudwash/) where purchasing
washing powder was part of the machine itself, and some secret projects where
the transactions and connectivity explored different configurations. It was my
colleagues who spent most time figuring out the service design and all the
mini design interactions – but I was steeped in this for a year or two, so I
figured I would dash out some notes…

Dash. Ho ho.

Look, a warning. I haven’t proofread these notes so they might make no sense.
And there’s nothing about how the Dash is designed, or what this means for
your strategy. Feel free to get in touch for a coffee if you want to talk
about either of those aspects, or if anything in what follows rings a bell for
you…

By putting the Dash Button in the home, it lowers friction to purchase and
shifts the distribution channel to Amazon.

This is good for:

You could probably make a pretty simple equation out of this, saying something
like… it’s worth it when:

_revenue from selling N buttons + N1 * channel cost saving + N2 * margin on
additional sales + value of effective marketing > development cost + server
cost for 1 year + cost of producing N buttons_

where N1 is the number of buttons used by existing customers who switch
channels, and N2 is the number of buttons used to make new purchases.

Assuming you’re giving these buttons away, and assuming you don’t have access
to the marketing budget, the relevant costs become:

And when these costs fall enough, the question becomes: Do you reckon you can
make a profit on the 2% of customers who will buy 5% more a year?

I brushed over the marketing benefits above, but let’s not forget that we’re
enamoured with web-connected physical things. Internet of Things gadgets are
novelty; brands that launched with Amazon will be pleased with the publicity.

Though… why not go with a Youtube video for the publicity, and not bother
making the thing itself, like [Evian’s fridge magnet launching their water
subscription service?](http://www.fastcocreate.com/1680932/evian-lets-you-
order-home-delivery-from-a-fridge-magnet) It’s a lot cheaper.

I can think of a couple of marketing benefits to actually making and
distributing the button itself.

Advertising is changing. You need Adwords and Facebook ads to fish where the
fish are… but come on, they’re boring, they don’t create the emotional impact
of a full-page glossy magazine ad, or a [great TV
spot.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5U9I7QrpSkk)

So, for me, these buttons are the first step to a new channel. Sure, they’re
utilitarian – they order more consumables. But they also tell a story that
this brand is there for me, it’s in my home, it’s at hand, on-demand.
[Products are people too](http://berglondon.com/talks/people/) and this button
_has_ a character… it’s now up to us to create physical objects that have
different characters, one that might be more suitable for high fashion,
fragrance, whatever.

You need these different marketing channels because building awareness
requires a drip-drip approach… a banner ad here, a Buzzfeed list there, a
button on the fridge. A new advertising component.

E-commerce continues to grow at the expense of physical retail, and discovery
in e-commerce continues to suck. Another way to think about the Dash Button is
that it’s doing the same job as a shelf-end promotion, or a BOGOF. This is a
replacement for the lost world of point-of-sale discovery tricks, and it’s in-
home.

In a way, we’re really seeing the future of marketing here. We’ve separated
awareness (advertising) and distribution (stores) for so long, but it’s no
longer the way. When you get [a Buy Now button in a
tweet](https://blog.twitter.com/2014/testing-a-way-for-you-to-make-purchases-
on-twitter) you’re seeing ads and distribution merging, and the Button is the
physical instantiation of this same trend.

In the future that Simon Wardley paints, this is a [warning shot against the
supermarkets](http://blog.gardeviance.org/2015/04/so-amazon-fired-warning-
shot-at.html), and in the future every product will carry a buy button. We’re
already in this world with smartphone apps: Because App Store discovery sucks,
the best mode of distribution is word of mouth. The more downloads you already
have, the more downloads you’ll get. Which is why app publishers need to get
their dirty mitts on your address book. Is this a future we’ll see with
consumable home products, too?

The costs of making the button dropped for Amazon before anyone else – as I
said above, they have the technology Lego bricks already, and the logistics
available. But there are two other groups I’ve run into repeatedly who have
looked seriously at the same concept

Traditional manufacturers of either FMCG or the kit that consumes it (that is,
makers of washing powder and makers of washing machines). In 90% of cases,
these manufacturers don’t know how to speak with end consumers. They maybe
know how to speak with consumers pre-sale… but they tend to outsource that to
marketing agencies. But typically their customers are distributors and
retailers, not end consumers.

This is a problem because the Dash Button isn’t just a button, it’s a
communications channel. It’s an app. It’s push notifications. It’s the update
emails. Somebody needs to write that copy, somebody needs to manage the
feedback, somebody needs to choose when to do a price promotion.

For most manufacturers, there’s not a group in the company that knows how to
do this, so making the Button isn’t an engineering challenge – it’s a
difficult corporate re-org where the voice that would advocate that strategy
isn’t even present in the leadership team.

There’s a particular problem for the device manufacturers, as opposed to the
manufacturers of the consumables. Connectivity of shared objects means back-
end servers, and these cost money to run. When you’re a big company, you think
via the profit and loss. A connected machine which just offers neat user
features (e.g. a notification when your wash cycle has finished) doesn’t make
sense on the P&L: it just means you have to knock points off your margin when
you first sell it, to put cash aside to keep the service running. The only way
connectivity makes sense is to align the recurring costs with some kind of
recurring revenue.

In 2015 that means creating a sales channel for consumables… which the white
goods manufacturers don’t have available to them. Ink-jet printer
manufacturers do. And we won’t be stuck as this stage forever. Give it 12
months, and you’ll have a microwave with in-app purchase. I’m only half
kidding.

The marketing agencies get it. But marketing agencies are organised (have
teams; do sales; are paid) around campaigns. Campaigns have a beginning and an
end. In the web world, we’re used to the KPIs of ongoing services
(acquisition, activation, retention, etc): we measure Monthly Active Users.
That’s what you need to build a new sales channel. But it’s not how you run a
successful campaign.

And besides, marketing agencies need to do something different every quarter –
they don’t build up a tight ops machine of technology and logistics. Building
the Dash Button isn’t, for them, just the next easy thing to do.

On my list of [startups I would
do](http://interconnected.org/home/2012/07/03/facebook_should_make_a_camera)
\- which is way too long and honestly, mostly _awful_ \- is an agency that
offers to speak with customers post-sale.

So the manufacturer of Break Maker X would get us in to run the communications
channel with the customers… either a button on the machine or just the app.
And we’d all come from the web world, so it would be all A/B testing emails,
looking at the button stats, partnerships with legendary bakers to sell
artisan yeast, all that nonsense. We’d run it on a retainer basis, and
eventually get bought by one of the big networks for a billion quid.

By the way, there is one group I’ve met who do (a) know how to have a customer
conversation, and (b) have an incentive to cross-sell and up-sell on that
channel. And that’s the retailers, especially the retailers who already have a
logistics network and run post-sales activities such as an extended warranty
programme.

In the UK, that means John Lewis/Waitrose – I was half expecting to see this
button come from them, first. But they don’t have “retail platform” in their
DNA like Amazon.

And there are _some_ manufacturers who understand that the product is the
channel. But I can’t say who because I’m still under NDA.

I have to say, the Amazon Dash Button makes a ton of sense to me, as the near
future of the Internet of Things, in a way the [internet
fridge](http://fuckyeahinternetfridge.tumblr.com) never has.

I’ve always said that if I was making an internet fridge, I’d just make a
fridge magnet that ordered milk. Or, better, a [tiny talking Fridgeezoo
pet](http://www.firebox.com/product/4399/Fridgeezoo-Fridge-Pets) that - when
tapped - would text both me and my wife “we’re out of milk!”

It’s that shared use that makes this button really great. Smartphones are
still stuck in the Personal Computer era… but my shopping list isn’t personal.
We live with flatmates, families, and friends. We can hack it – at home we use
[shared Reminders on
iPhone](https://support.apple.com/kb/PH12516?locale=en_GB) for the weekly
shopping. But my online grocery order is associated with a single user
account. It seems dumb; the button fixes that.

It’s the ability for some kid in the household to say “hey, need more
toothpaste” that leads to the button requiring wi-fi: Bluetooth is cheaper,
but it would need a paired smartphone around.

And I _am_ curious to see how it all works. The service design is complicated…
without a screen, or any feedback, maybe your order is already on the way
because somebody else hit the button, but how do you know? Sure the button
automagically doesn’t place a repeat order until the delivery is made, but
what about more complex orders, or what if what you want is out of stock?
Ultimately, this’ll do for 80% of the cases, which is more than enough.

And then - for the rest - there’s the [Dash Replacement
Service](https://www.amazon.com/oc/dash-replenishment-service), Amazon’s
button-to-logistics technology all wrapped up, and ready to be integrated into
whatever product you’re creating. I see Quirky are building this replenishment
service into the device itself:

a new line of smart appliances including an artisanal pour-over coffee
machine, a baby formula maker, and a pet food dispenser. Each appliance will
measure remaining consumable supplies and place an order using DRS before
running out.

DRS is the best bit. Can you imagine what the life-time value is, for Amazon,
if [white goods manufacturer] bake this into a washing machine, an item with
an 11 year replacement cycle?

We’re seeing the various stacks line up to own the smart home ecosystem:

I know the Dash Button feels utilitarian – but to my mind it’s also eminently
sensible, and executed in exactly the right way. I like it. If it does well,
it’ll make possible connected devices which are less utilitarian. I’ll like
that even more.
