# Acts Not Facts #8: clock news, client news, AI, AI, AI, and plans

Happy new year!

Some years I see how long I can feasibly say Happy New Year to people. My
record is March. But this year 2023 already feels like months and months ago.

It’s the first Acts Not Facts update of the year! Weekly is too frequent. But
I’ll write notes periodically and there’s a lot to cover today.

My AI clock is now named **Poem/1** and - BIG NEWS - Kickstarter gave the
green light to the campaign yesterday. So now I’m getting the last few things
lined up before hitting that _Launch_ button.

[More news over at the AI clock newsletter.](https://aiclock.substack.com)
tl;dr,

Oh I missed this media first time around: Bloomberg interviewed Mira Murati,
OpenAI’s CTO, and used my clock as the first example. Watch [Inside OpenAI by
Bloomberg Originals](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p9Q5a1Vn-Hk) _(YouTube,
at 3m7s)._

That client I haven’t been able to name? It’s GOV.UK, the part of UK gov that
looks after digital information and services.

They started experimenting with AI really early, and built and tested a chat
UI for the 700,000 pages of information that they look after. [The GOV.UK Chat
research findings have now been
published.](https://insidegovuk.blog.gov.uk/2024/01/18/the-findings-of-our-
first-generative-ai-experiment-gov-uk-chat/) It’s been amazing to watch. There
are some unique challenges.

Personally I’ve been helping out with _“what next”…_ how should GOV.UK
systematically explore AI to build capability and open the imagination, and
what is the strategic “why” here? Well, eventually to help transform how
people interact with government, sure, but there are stepping stones to be
chosen.

[The new AI Team is announced
here](https://insidegovuk.blog.gov.uk/2024/01/18/experimenting-with-how-
generative-ai-could-help-gov-uk-users/) by Chris Bellamy, Director of GOV.UK.
I’ve been bringing a perspective of design pathfinding, one that I [first
talked about with the BMJ back in
May](https://www.actsnotfacts.com/made/large-language-models) and then [wrote
up here in more detail](/home/2023/12/08/ai-pathfinding) _(Dec 2023)._

Plus some heavy advocacy for thinking through making, alongside the research…

More to say about all of that another time I’m sure. It’s a privilege working
with this smart and motivated team.

My mainline client continues to be PartyKit, where I invent in order to
stretch and explore their new platform for the realtime, multiplayer internet.

Just before the holidays PartyKit shipped AI integrations, and I wrote a long
piece on the blog:

The tl;dr is that search got really good suddenly and really easy to build
because of AI.

For instance, this is the search experience I recently made for my side
project website Braggoscope.

It’s a straightforward, show-the-code account of one of the fundamental
techniques in building with AI. One reader review: "Was reading the Vector DB
blog and honestly I think one of the most approachable blogs I’ve seen on the
topic + demo" – so I’m pleased with that.

I really enjoyed writing it.

What I find hardest to communicate to people who work with technology, before
they use AI, is how much they need to reset their assumptions about how hard
things are. e.g. a great search engine is so _easy_ now.

The best way to demystify is to go line-by-line. Code isn’t scary.

And there’s no magic here. An embedding model is just a function call, a
vector database is just a function call, broadcasting messages to a
multiplayer room is a function call, keeping multiplayer state is a function
call. All realtime, all scalable, there’s nothing to it.

I haven’t sat down and made a year plan for Acts Not Facts, this oh-so-nascent
product invention femto-studio of mine. Here’s my off the cuff _prompt
completion_ on the matter…

I would say that I’m roughly where I wanted to be, a year in. [As the big Venn
on the ANF website says](https://www.actsnotfacts.com), I’m focused on AI,
group experiences, and embodiment. At the end of 2023 I’ve built up a decent
portfolio that demonstrates precisely that. Good!

Which means the next step is to pick up a team project. Ideally something that
involves invention, AI, interactions, and hardware where I get to hire a tiny
dream team to deliver.

Lmk if there’s a project we should talk about.

p.s. I have that SF/Bay Area trip [coming up w/c 5
Feb](/home/2024/01/11/travel). My schedule’s filling up. I’d love to squeeze
in a couple more chats.
