# Post at 17.16, on Wednesday 12 Jan 2011

Back in 2003, [Mike Kuniavsky](http://www.orangecone.com/ "Author of 'Smart
Things' -- designer, ubicomp maker and theorist.") gave a talk called [The
Coming Age of
Magic](http://www.orangecone.com/archives/2007/03/coming_age_of_m.html "At
O'Reilly Emerging Tech, where else?") in which he speculated about how to
design for ubicomp.

Ubicomp? Ubicomp is _ubi_ quitous _comp_ uting, and it's the quick way of
talking about what happens when computers are so small and so cheap that we
put them in all kinds of products and environments. Like toys, and
[toilets,](http://www.wired.co.uk/news/archive/2011-01/06/sega-toylets-japan "Toylets. They must have made this only for the pun of it.") and clothing, and
desks and buildings. Why? Because it can be handy and fun. In 2003 this was
_future._ In 2011 it's everyday (just flick through a copy of the [Argos
catalogue](http://www.argos.co.uk/static/Home.htm "Catalogue shopping on the
high-street. Blows my mind.")), or at least getting that way. I mean
everything from iPhones to digital photo frames to the [Magic Wand TV remote
control](http://www.firebox.com/product/2481/The-Wand-TV-Remote-Control "We
totally live in the stupid future.") (swish zap) to [Zhu Zhu
Hamsters](http://www.amazon.com/Zhu-Pets-Funhouse-Set-Hamster/dp/B002B54KLM "Massively popular AI toys.") (artificially intelligent!).

Mike talked about animism and enchanted objects, which is where we interact
with things like they have lives of their own. It's the difference between a
screwdriver (a tool) and a puppy (a fuzzy autonomous being). Once products
start behaving in ways that aren't totally predictable, maybe we need to start
designing them to show off their _magic._

Along the way he cited some research that stuck in my head: [Folk Biology and
the Anthropology of Science: Cognitive Universals and Cultural
Particulars](http://sitemaker.umich.edu/satran/files/bbs98.atran.pdf "Human
categorisation of stuff around us.") (S. Atran, 1998). Mike summarises, "Most
world cultures classify all entities into one of four general classifications.
... Humans; nonhuman animals; plants; nonliving things."

It's a lovely little insight. And it's interesting because it happens across a
bunch of cultures! The paper puts it pithily: "Such taxonomies are not as
arbitrary in structure and content, nor as variable across cultures, as the
assembly of entities into cosmologies, materials or social groups. These
structures are routine products of our 'habits of mind,' which may be in part
naturally selected to grasp relevant and recurrent _'habits of the world.'_"

Atran goes on to look at this _folk biology_ in some detail. ("Folk" is the
prefix given to pre-theoretic understanding of a bunch of different
disciplines. For instance, [folk
physics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Na√Øve_physics "Wikipedia link because
I'm lazy.") says that we believe, like Aristotle, that objects fly through the
air then drop suddenly when thrown, like [Coyote charging off a cliff then
falling only as he realises where he
is,](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_d8ROhH3_vs "Roadrunner cartoon.") rather
than falling with the smooth parabola that actually occurs in ballistics, and
you can observe this innate belief when studying the reactions of babies.
There is also [folk psychology,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Folk_psychology "Which I need to learn more about.") which I don't know much about, and more.)

It turns out we treat plants and animals somewhat specially: we're really good
at classifying and grouping them, and - as humans - we tend to all do it
roughly the same way. This grouping ability doesn't carry across to things
that _aren't_ animals or plants. There's a neat bit of evidence for this that
made me laugh: "comparing constellations in the cosmologies of Ancient China,
Greece and the Aztec Empire shows little commonality. By contrast, herbals
like the Ancient Chinese _ERH YA,_ Theophrastus's _Peri Puton Istorias,_ and
the Aztec _Badianus Codex,_ share important features, such as the
classification of generic species into tree and herb life forms."

_Anyway, my question is this:_ as humans, we'll treat animals and not-animals
differently. There are qualities of animals we'd be surprised to see in not-
animals, like autonomous behaviour and memory, and maybe we're more inclined
to learn from animals or treat them ethically? So how do we distinguish
between the two? Would it be enough to put a smiley face on a doll? Or would
it need to be a doll that said random things? Or a doll that wasn't random but
reacted to you in some way?

How much spirit of life is _enough_ spirit of life to make the difference?
