# Post at 21.47, on Thursday 24 Jan 2008

[Anonymous has declared war on the Church of
Scientology](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JCbKv9yiLiQ "Video announcement.
There's a transcription in the comments.") ([more
news](http://en.wikinews.org/wiki/%22Anonymous%22_releases_statements_outlining_%22War_on_Scientology%22 "Appropriately crowdsourced.")). I just read this on the internet: "WE SHALL
NEVER ASK FOR RANSOM. WE SHALL NEVER YIELD FOR NEGOTIATIONS. THERE ARE NO
DEMANDS. THERE ARE NO DESIRES. THERE IS NO FUNDING, NO LEADERSHIP, NO
MEMBERSHIP, NO POLITICAL GOAL. ANONYMOUS WISHES TO SEE SCIENTOLOGY FALL, FOR
NO OTHER REASON THAN IT WOULD BE AWESOME. PEOPLE DO NOT PROPERLY UNDERSTAND
THIS. YET."

[On Slashdot, a comment
explains:](http://yro.slashdot.org/comments.pl?sid=428834&cid=22167962 "So
says Anonymous Coward.") "Memetic warfare. Walk down the street and ask random
people "What's the first thing you think of when you hear the word
'$cientology'"? If it's "Tom Cruise", the person could still be sucked into
the cult. ... When it's "Xenu!", "Scam", "Money", ... the person will never be
sucked into the cult. ... At some point - 20%? 50%? 90%? - herd immunity
develops."

Anonymous is not an organisation but [an ideology that exists as a
population](http://www.spiked-online.com/Articles/00000006DFED.htm "Except
self-named, which is curious."). It can't do or think anything itself except
metaphorically. Individuals who act in the same way as Anonymous but who have
never heard of it can't be described as being part of it. This is an entity
that exists as an auto-catalytic set in the social network. There is no leader
who can give orders because identity cannot be verified from one instant to
the next; there is perhaps a leadership organ. Whereas our society of
capitalism and marketing is a control society which attempts to manipulate the
network while keeping it computable (that is, conforming to a model held by
the control system), Anonymous is a non-computable part of the network. That's
what makes it dangerous. [A part of the network outside the control structure
which is developing self-
awareness.](<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skynet_(fictional)> "It's not
computer A.I. we should be scared of, but independent intelligences existing
on the social substrate.")

(What strikes me most about the [anti-Scientology
videos](http://gawker.com/347367/why-kids-on-the-internet-are-scientologys-
most-powerful-enemy "A guide to the war from Gawker.com.") is that individuals
are using the same techniques of manipulation and persuasion that Hollywood,
advertising and the state have used on the general population. I find this
heartening.)
