# Early web videos, eye contact, and anti-attention

I’ve been watching web videos from the early 2000s, and all I can think of is
the _eyes._ It’s incredible.

So the **Flagpole Sitta Lip Dub** was posted in 2007. [It’s the first video in
Andy Baio’s lip dup cultural history.](https://waxy.org/2017/04/the-flagpole-
sitta-lip-dub-turns-10/) Watch it again, it launched a thousand copycats and
it’s still magical - a lip sync music video which is so well done, but also so
clearly “real” and not professional.

And it opens with Amandalyn Ferri looking right through the screen, straight
down the barrel.

_(Web videos were new at the time. YouTube was founded in 2005. It was
acquired by Google in 2006.)_

Then there’s Ze Frank’s video project [The
Show](http://www.zefrank.com/theshow/): "‘the show with zefrank’ was a short
video program produced Monday through Friday for one year (March 17, 2006 -
March 17, 2007)."

As an example, [here’s The Show from 14 July
2006](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4xSW_NlrVBY&list=PLMs_JcuNozJa7tg80N_kITisZjHHeE3uo&index=83).
I think it was originally on his site as a made-for-iPod show? But now the
video is on YouTube. (This one is my favourite episode because it’s a defence
of [ugliness as the democratisation of
design](/home/2012/05/22/ze_frank_on_ugly).)

If you take a look at the video, you’ll notice two things:

Ze doesn’t blink.

He’s basically inventing the form for personal web videos here (it’s 2006
don’t forget), and already he’s messing with the idiom by using this crazy
jitter of quick cuts to not blink.

From a really solid long read about the “poetics” of web video: "The poetics
of any artistic medium studies the finished work as the result of a process of
construction."

Beginning in April, 2006, Frank stops blinking onscreen. His eyes are always
open wide in an exaggeration of an attentive stare. In an interview he has
said that not blinking is a product of his intense concentration but in the
episode on 23 October 2006, he advises would-be vloggers not to blink because
**when you blink, “that’s one less connection made”** with viewers.

I remember reading that the ideal amount of time for mutual eye contact [is
3.2 seconds](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/eye-contact-how-long-
is-too-long/) and longer than that feels weird (read: threatening or arousing,
depending on the situation I guess).

But Ze is 3 minutes!

And on Zoom calls it’s 30 minutes to an _hour!_ No wonder video calling can be
so exhausting.

**See also:** Apple’s [FaceTime Attention Correction
feature](/home/2019/07/04/attention_correction) (in which your pupils were
artificially manipulated in video calls to look right into the camera) which
fortunately did not launch.

And just think about this: the idiom of web video didn’t necessarily _have_ to
be straight to camera. It _could_ have been, like TV, modelled on theatre: a
performance on a little stage in a little box, with everyone studiously
pretending there is no audience.

There’s a ton online about how to hold a person’s gaze for _just one beat
longer_ in order to

Which is a hella creepy.

I wonder… what would _anti-attention_ features be like?

How about a pair of augmented reality glasses with an app to manipulate
everything I see, ensuring that _no-one,_ no matter how
[charismatic](/home/2020/04/17/charisma), could hold my gaze for longer than
3.2 seconds?

Would this let me assess an argument better, if I could wear a software
inoculation against enchantment?

And - continuing on this line - what if our politicians were made to wear such
A.R. specs, so they couldn’t be wooed by charismatic leaders, and our TVs had
filters built in, so we could shield ourselves from being drawn into any
hypnotic gaze?

Human interaction firewalls.

Charisma shades.
