# Augmented reality should use magic mirrors, not glasses

I’m into the idea of augmented reality because it makes sense that computing
is anchored to the real world.

Of course I should be able to pinch my fingers on a paragraph in a real
printed book to copy-and-paste the text into my notes. Naturally I should be
able to look out of my window and double-blink at my car, bringing up a
readout of how much fuel I have and how much time is left on the lease. Or
look up at the sky to see the weather forecast printed on a cloud. Or at my
sourdough starter to see it ghosted against the size it was early today, so I
can tell at a glance how much it has risen.

But augmented reality is always about _glasses._ See: the [Magic Leap
One](https://www.theverge.com/2018/8/8/17662040/magic-leap-one-creator-
edition-preview-mixed-reality-glasses-launch) A.R. goggles.

See Apple: the continuous rumours about Apple’s [secret smart glasses
project](https://www.macrumors.com/roundup/apple-glasses/). Apple’s [existing
augmented reality platform](https://www.apple.com/uk/augmented-reality/) which
is always about looking _through._

BUT.

**Glasses are anti-social.** I want to show people what I’m working on by
having them look over my shoulder. I’ve lost count of the number of times I’ve
shared a photo by holding my phone up to Zoom. When A. is cooking, she can
call across from another room to have me check the stove – how bad it would be
if the stove interface was locked away in her personal glasses. Sure, all
computer interface problems are solvable with design and work – but A.R. is
creating a _lot_ of unnecessary work if it starts with an interface which is
so oriented to the individual from day 1.

And then: **how do we get there from here?** I can imagine a world where
augmented reality is the _only_ interface – Keiichi Matsuda’s still-amazing-
and-disconcerting 2016 film is such a vision: [HYPER-
REALITY](https://vimeo.com/166807261).

Can I imagine HYPER-REALITY _alongside_ today’s smartphones? Can I imagine
taking glasses on and off just to check a document or two? Not really. But
that’s the reality of technology adoption. Adoption and sophistication proceed
stepwise.

So what’s the first step into mainstream augmented reality? Perhaps: not
glasses.

Here’s [KOSKI GAME](https://www.studiodeform.com/koski-game) (2016) by Václav
Mlynář/Studio Deform:

KOSKI is a mixed-reality building block game. It is a combination of real,
wooden blocks and a virtual app that facilitates digital, interactive game
play. With the help of a tablet or smartphone, structures assembled from the
blocks come alive. Once a player starts to interact with the blocks, the game
begins to reveal it’s hidden worlds, characters, and stories.

[Watch the KOSKI intro video](https://www.studiodeform.com/koski-
game/2018/3/1/mrqobvaz492byr4r91ygvhma3ralri) (1m23s).

It’s a physical sandbox game for kids. You stack real world wooden blocks.
Next to the game area, you prop up your iPad.

The iPad is a **magic mirror.**

As you stack the blocks, they comes alive in the magic mirror. Figures climb
the structure; waterfalls appear.

_What struck me, using KOSKI, is how natural it felt._ When you’re playing
with the blocks, and looking at the augmented reflection in the screen facing
you, your neuroplasticity takes over in an instance. It’s as if the blocks in
the hands actually have trees growing out of them and tiny cartoon people are
balanced there.

We shouldn’t be surprised. When I’m selecting text on my screen, I’m not
conscious of my fingers being on the trackpad and the pixels being many inches
away. The two feel identical.

_(The designer created this game while part of[Platform
24](http://rcaplatform24.com), Design Products at the Royal College of Art,
while I was also lending a hand. It’s stuck in my head since.)_

What if the magic mirror is the right way to start with augmented reality?

Not looking _through,_ which presupposes an individual perspective, whether
you’re looking through glasses or looking through a phone.

But instead _reflecting what’s between you,_ as if the magic mirror screen is
part of your team, or part of a small group of kids playing, just another
group member adding their point of view.

For kids, it’s way more social. Kids already play together. It makes sense to
have have just another party saying (visually; nonverbally) _hey, let’s have a
waterwall here, and hey what if that figure needed a bridge_ – and the other
kids are free to play along or to do something else. (A.R. glasses don’t feel
nearly as nuanced.)

For me, individually, I can imagine propping up an iPad on my desk, off to one
side, and working on a printed document. When I make edits on the doc, I
glance to left to see my work reflected in the tablet screen, and translated
into Google Docs edits. The mirror is populated with team-mates adding their
comments – checking them is just like looking into the sidebar.

And let’s pretend that one day we’re back in offices…

Abstractly, the magic mirror is a screen that looks back when you’re looking
at it, and can intelligently add to whatever it displays.

So, building on that: instead of screen sharing to a room projector, why not
hold my smartphone up to the magic mirror, which then captures and magnifies
whichever doc I had on my display, showing it to everyone in the room? Simple
steps.

A couple of speculative form factors:

The metaphor here is that augmented reality doesn’t have to feel like a
[cyborg enhancement](/home/2020/04/07/cyborg_prosthetics). It can feel like a
companion, or friend, or team member.

I’m not saying _never_ glasses. With magic mirrors I’m saying perhaps – also?
Or, first? Or, let’s try it because the technical barriers are lower and the
use cases for immediate? That’s all.

For my own curiosity, I’d be interested to know if anybody is pursuing the
magic mirror paradigm for augmented reality – do let me know if you’re working
on it.
