# Microdosing cathedrals and the synthetic acoustic environment of the ancient world

Archaeoacoustics is the study of what ancient places sounded like. For
example: the colosseum in Rome when full and thriving. The archaeology of
sound.

There are many examples in [Wikipedia’s article on
Archaeoacoustics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Archaeoacoustics).

For instance, the Mayan pyramid of Kukulkan at Chichen Itza: the pyramid’s
stairs give a curious “chirp” echo in respond to a hand clap.

After studying the staircases and analyzing his recordings and sonograms of
the echoes, Lubman came back convinced that this was no architectural freak.
In his paper, Lubman argued that the design of the staircases was deliberate
and that _the echo is an ancient recording, coded in stone, of the call of the
Maya’s sacred bird, the quetzal._

_Another:_

Cave paintings in northern Finland: "the researchers concluded that the cliffs
with rock paintings are efficient sound reflectors (Rainio et al., 2018). _The
sound appears to emanate directly from the painted figures._"

That example from this wonderful paper introducing the new discipline of
**experimental psychoarchaeoacoustics:** "our focus will be on what led people
to paint or engrave rock art at sonorous sites in the distant past. We wish to
inquire into perception and emotion in the past related to sound."

_Ref._

Valenzuela, J., D’iaz-Andreu, M., & Escera, C. (2020). [Psychology Meets
Archaeology: Psychoarchaeoacoustics for Understanding Ancient Minds and Their
Relationship to the
Sacred.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7775382/) Frontiers in
Psychology, 11, 550794.

(Musical instruments made of rock are called
[lithophones](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lithophone).)

LENGTHY ASIDE:

Could ancient sound be frozen unintentionally?

In February 1969, in a humour column in _New Scientist:_

[A] trowel, like any flat plate, must vibrate in response to sound: thus,
drawn over the wet surface by the singing plasterer, it must emboss a
gramophone-type recording of his song in the plaster. Once the surface is dry,
it may be played back.

(The column is collected in [The Inventions of
Daedalus](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Inventions-Daedalus-Compendium-Plausible-
Paperback/dp/B010EWKVTI/) by David Jones, which I have on my shelf.)

And in August 1969, in _Proceedings of the IEEE,_ a letter titled "Acoustic
Recordings from Antiquity" which is completely straight-faced:

With an artist’s brush, paint strokes were applied to the surface of the
canvas using “oil” paints involving a variety of plasticities, thicknesses,
layers, etc., while martial music was played on the nearby phonograph. Visual
examination at low magnification showed that certain strokes had the expected
transverse striated appearance. When such strokes, after drying, were gently
stroked by the “needle” (small, wooden, spade-like) of the crystal cartridge,
at as close to the original stroke speed as possible, short snatches of the
original music could be identified. …

_This is to record the finding of a spoken word in an oil portrait. The word
was “blue” and was located in a blue paint stroke-as if the artist was talking
to himself or to the subject._

Bizarrely the author of the letter claims to have written their letter in
January 1969, before the Daedelus column, and had it rejected.

_SCIENTIST JAPES._

There are two good write-ups of this unlikely-but-fun-to-imagine discovery:

RELATED:

Researchers at MIT, Microsoft, and Adobe have developed an algorithm that can
reconstruct an audio signal by analyzing minute vibrations of objects depicted
in video. In one set of experiments, they were able to recover intelligible
speech from the vibrations of a potato-chip bag photographed from 15 feet away
through soundproof glass.

A video of a crisp packet! Voices in the room!

(You need a camera that can record 2,000–6,000 frames per second. A phone does
60 fps.)

Labs that investigate archaeocoustics have to do so with simulation, using
room acoustics software and VR. Here’s a write-up by room acoustics software
provider Odeon, [including a simulated auralisation of Hagia
Sophia](https://odeon.dk/learn/articles/archaeoacoustics/).

There are also labs that investigate psychoacoustics experimentally.
[immpaLAB: Immersive PsychoAcoustic
Laboratory](https://www.ub.edu/artsoundscapes/immpalab-immersive-
psychoacoustic-laboratory/) creates sound environments and collects responses…
"examples of affective labels used in these scales are ‘tension’, ‘power’,
‘transcendence’, ‘joy’."

I feel like I’d like to have these brought together: given a location that no
longer exists, a cave or a stone circle or an amphitheatre, how would it make
you feel? And reversing it: given a desired psychological profile, what’s the
architecture of the space I should be in?

You can close your eyes and click or hum and tell if you’re in a tiny or vast
space.

_([Ancient humans may have used echolocation to navigate underground
caves](https://www.atlasobscura.com/articles/human-echolocation) and I
understand that echolocation - [like seeing polarised
light](/home/2022/07/27/filtered) \- is a learnable skill.)_

So: can you have computational synthetic acoustics?

Like, could I wear headphones and have the acoustic space of the Colosseum or
Hagia Sophia or Abbey Road wrapped around my music? Could I buy awe as an in-
app purchase? How about a realtime psychoacoustic graphic equaliser with
passthrough, mutating the everyday sound of the street such that I’m
microdosing cathedrals?

I mentioned recently ([here](/home/2022/10/21/ca)) that I have this
[livestream of a waterhole in the Namibian
desert](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ydYDqZQpim8) _(YouTube)_ open in the
background a whole bunch at the moment. The _why_ is the sound (I have it on
now). You can hear the desert wind, the birds chattering and the antelope
chuntering to one-another; the sky changes over the day, the animals come and
go. It’s calming. I can focus. Why have music? Well I have music too. Why not
more of this?

My dream would be to inhabit this aural environment as I go about my day,
ambiently, not immersive exactly but everywhere, a layer of dreaming
overlaying the reality of my home – upstairs the forest, in my office the
desert. In the middle of the night if I tiptoe all the way downstairs I step
in the dark onto the savannah and bathe in the [nocturnal infrasonic hum of
giraffe](/home/2019/07/19/filtered_for_sexy_animals) calling across the open
plain.

Hey happy Friday y’all. I don’t say that enough. I hope you’re in a good
place. Look after yourself.
