# From the archives, w/e 28 May

Blog posts this week from years gone by.

**[A month long conference is a neat
concept](/home/2020/05/24/a_month_long_conference)** (24 May 2020).

They’re moving on from the standard two day conference format … our online
conference program will take place weekly, across a whole month.

I’m giving a talk next week which is broken up into 3 x 30 minute chunks
across consecutive days. I still think there’s a lot to be explored in novel
conference formats.

**[How I would put voice control in everything](/home/2020/05/26/voice)** (26
May 2020).

Stick a timer in my stove, a switch in my light bulb, give each a super
limited vocabulary, never connect to the internet, and only act when somebody
is addressing you.

Also includes the idea of a dedicated attention sensor, so a device knows when
it is being glanced at or pointed at.

**[Grocery shopping, localism, and last mile
delivery](/home/2020/05/28/grocery_shopping)** (28 May 2020).

Corporations and startups will inevitably move hard into the last mile
delivery space. How do we make sure it’s not shit?

The lockdown forced me into a kind of localism for groceries and I have to say
I liked it.

**[Ze Frank on ugly](/home/2012/05/22/ze_frank_on_ugly)** (22 May 2012).

“In Myspace, millions of people have opted out of pre-made templates that
‘work’ in exchange for ugly. Ugly when compared to pre-existing notions of
taste is a bummer. But ugly as a representation of mass experimentation and
learning is pretty damn cool.”

A classic Ze Frank monologue on personal expression, and an idea I come back
to again and again.

**[The geometry of music](/home/2008/05/26/the_geometry_of_music)** (26 May
2008).

Cause and effect are confused. Which comes first, the visualisation or the
music? If Tymoczko watched a partner and I dancing, could he interpret the
plan view of the ballroom as an orbifold, run his algorithms backwards, and
play generated Chopin that was magically in sync with our improvisation?

Sadly most of the links in this post are broken. But the idea of a “reverse
music visualiser” seems more achievable than it was when I wrote this post.
Imagine staring out of a car window, and having the rhythms and regularities
of passing traffic, street lighting, and clouds all style-transferred back
onto Chemical Brothers beats played through your headphones…

_Posts selected from the[On This Day](/home/on-this-day) archive spelunking
page. This is an experiment to see how to best include old posts in the
current feed in a meaningful way, possibly as a regular Friday feature._

Blog posts this week from years gone by.

**[Gross National Diversity](/home/2020/05/19/resiliance)** (19 May 2020).

What if it’s vital to the future to preserve alternate ways of living and
alternate ways of thinking?

**[Rambling thoughts about cyborgs and
emotions](/home/2020/05/20/cyborgs_and_emotions)** (20 May 2020).

What is the kind of laughter we feel, watching a puzzle being solved? And a
side question: what is the spiritual component of the climate crisis? (That’s
a question that I’d like to come back to.)

**[FuelBand for alpha waves](/home/2012/05/16/fuelband_for_alpha_waves)** (16
May 2012).

How about a wearable device that measures your attention patterns over the
day? Thinking about this in 2021, I’ve been monitoring my sleep this week with
my Apple Watch and it’s intriguing without dictating behaviour, which I like.
Why shouldn’t some upcoming version of AirPods include an EEG sensor and give
me a focus vs zen readout? I doubt anyone really knows what the patterns mean…
but maybe that’s for lack of data. Apple already runs large scale experiments
to look for (as an example) heart arrhythmia with the watch. Could it also run
large scale experiments to find meaning in brainwave traces? And, if you could
see how much “downtime” your brain had day by day, and how that correlated
with your mood, would you make different life decisions? Could some future
Apple Specs be a device for mental insights (at least of a certain kind) just
as the wrist wearable is a device for physical health?

_(Posts selected from the[On This Day](/home/on-this-day) archive spelunking
page. This is an experiment to see how to best include old posts in the
current feed in a meaningful way. I’m currently thinking about this as a
regular Friday feature.)_

Blog posts this week from years gone by.

**[Filtered for musical cyborgs](/home/2020/05/29/musical_cyborgs)** (29 May
2020).

Another article goes hard on how the beats aren’t humanly possible: The
prosthetic arm can play the drums four times faster than humans.

The arm can also play strange polyrhythms that no human can play.

It’s a collection of links, mostly videos, about music instruments that are
also cyborg prostheses.

**[Experiments with projectors and video calls](/home/2020/06/04/projectors)**
(4 June 2020).

I’ve been posting recently about video calls and online talks. And, in the
spirit of that, last week tweeted about a ridiculous experiment with an
overhead projector.

Aha, that experiment was fun! That post was the write-up; [here are the
photos](/more/2020/05/projector-vc/). Sadly I no longer have a wall behind me
at my desk, so I can’t project over my head and “write” on the wall during
video calls. But it would be neat to reboot this somehow.

**[Four short stories and what I learnt writing
them](/home/2018/05/31/upsideclown)** (31 May 2018).

I wouldn’t say I’m great at writing fiction. I find it tough. It is the
easiest thing in the world for me to pick holes in what I’ve written. So
instead, as an exercise - and as some personal positive reinforcement - I want
to remind myself what I learnt writing each one, and also what I like.

From time to time I write short fiction, usually sci-fi (though not lately).
This post links out to four stories and what I learnt in the process of
writing each one. I’m still pleased with this one, from December 2017: [The
search for another intelligence](http://upsideclown.com/2017-12-04).

_Posts selected from the[On This Day](/home/on-this-day) archive spelunking
page. This is an experiment to see how to best include old posts in the
current feed in a meaningful way, possibly as a regular Friday feature._

Some blog posts this week from years gone by.

**[Singing bridges](/home/2020/06/08/singing_bridges)** (8 June 2020).

I’m also pretty taken with the idea that we _don’t_ know what the Golden Gate
Bridge is singing about, other than it being windy. It tickles me that the
bridge has its own internal life that leads it to sing, but it’s no more
speaking to us than a blackbird. Why should the bridge _want_ to tell us
anything? _And why would we be able to understand it if it did?_

What is the song of our cities?

**[Meat and gratitude](/home/2019/06/06/grativore)** (6 June 2019).

For me, I do continue to eat meat (although less than I used). But I think a
lot of my discomfort around it - environmentally, the agro-industry, health -
is displacement from the hard-to-digest fact that, when I’ve met a cow,
they’re super nice to hang out with, and I could see us being friends. And
that feeling isn’t going to go away.

We should say “thank you” to meat. Or stop eating it, I suppose.

**[The source of a diamond](/home/2008/06/10/the_source_of_a_diamond)** (10
June 2008).

“The source of a diamond is a kimberlite pipe, a form of diatreme–a relatively
small hole bored through the crust of the earth by an expanding combination of
carbon dioxide and water which rises from within the earth’s mantle and moves
so fast driving magma to the surface that is breaks into the atmosphere at
supersonic speeds.”

This is simply an extended quote from John McPhee’s monumental [Annals of the
Former World](https://www.pulitzer.org/winners/john-mcphee), and these two
things are equally extraordinary: (a) how diamonds come to be; (b) McPhee’s
command of the written word.

Read the whole thing.

([Another quote.](https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/282197-when-the-climbers-
in-1953-planted-their-flags-on-the) _Swoon._)

_Some favourite posts selected from this week’s[On This Day](/home/on-this-
day) archive spelunking page. This is an experiment to see how to best surface
older ideas in the current feed in a meaningful way, possibly as a regular
Friday feature._

Three recommended blog posts from the archives, originally published this week
in years gone by.

**[From the other side of the bridge](/home/2020/06/12/gibson)** (12 June
2020).

There’s a story about William Gibson’s jacket. In his book _Pattern
Recognition_ he confabulates a jacket for the protagonist, Cayce, in a
colourway that never existed.

And where it ends up: "Both the molecular structure of benzene and the
molecular structure of DNA were brought back from dreams."

**[Filtered for hallway tracks and spreadsheet
parties](/home/2020/06/15/hallway_track)** (15 June 2020).

So if we’re doing conference talks on video now, how do we do the hallway
track? And should the two remain bundled together?

I still haven’t seen a virtual events platform which gets the spontaneous, in-
between nature of the conference hallway track. This is a _“Filtered for…”_
post which means it has lots of external links.

Also this is an idea I should come back to:

Personal theory: as we’re at home more, and smartphones ebb, the technology
that succeeds will be the technology that facilitates multi-tasking.

**[On conversational UIs](/home/2015/06/16/conversational_uis)** (16 June
2015).

My point, I guess, is that a new medium needs a new grammar and conversational
UIs are definitely a new medium.

For one – they’re intrinsically social. If I’m chatting with a bot in iMessage
about what movies are on nearby, shouldn’t I be able to turn that into a group
chat with my partner? And does the bot conduct two separate conversations, one
with each of us, or assume we’re both searching for the same movie?

Remember chat bots? They were going to be huge. Hey and it might still happen!
Large language models (i.e. GPT-3 and the like) are making natural language
easy for computers, and conversational user interfaces make a ton more sense
if we’re using smart watches and smart ear buds instead of phones.

This post still gets a bunch of traffic and it’s a fun read – it has a _ton_
of examples of different conversational UIs, and breaks down the challenges in
making conversation the primary interface.

_Personal favourites selected from this week’s[On This Day](/home/on-this-day)
archive spelunking page. This is an experiment to see how to best surface
older ideas in the current feed in a meaningful way, and I’m trying it as a
regular Friday feature. Keep-going/why-not-try-this-instead feedback welcome._
