# When you’re driving in Google Maps you’re re-enacting an ancient space combat sim

This week I’m midway through my now-annual lecture series on [folktales from
the history of computing](https://www.actsnotfacts.com/made/folktales) at
[AHO](https://aho.no/en) (the Oslo School of Architecture and Design).

The idea is that I trace an admittedly idiosyncratic path through the history
of the personal computer by focusing on certain stories that were, once upon a
time, handed down to me as being pivotal. (Though I try to be rigorous when it
comes to the lineage: I love evidence for the interconnections.)

Then I unpack the tales to look at the world they were in, roads not taken,
voices not heard, and I share a view on where I stand with respect to what we
should take from it all.

With a dash of speculative design and storytelling.

Look, it’s this blog in lecture form, that’s all you need to know.

I’m pretty well grooved in now. This is my fourth time giving the talks with
AHO, and I had a ton of fun doing the whole series on three successive nights
for a tech conference back in 2021.

But: each year I keep notes of where I feel I hit speed bumps to fix for the
next time. And the opening of the first talk has never felt satisfying to me.
Too much exposition, not enough feel.

Anyway! I fixed that this year! I have a new story to open.

It’s about the little dart-shaped arrow that appears at the top of your iPhone
when an app is using your location. [You know the arrow I
mean.](https://support.apple.com/en-gb/102647) The students all recognise it
too.

The heart of this story is from research and a long read by [Benj
Edwards](https://www.benjedwards.com), tech historian and journalist.

Back in 2015, Edwards published this amazing history of the first ever in-car
computerised navigation system:

Thirty years ago, a company called Etak released the first commercially
available computerized navigation system for automobiles. Spearheaded by an
engineer named Stan Honey and bankrolled by Nolan Bushnell, the cofounder of
Atari, the company’s Navigator was so far ahead of its time that the phrase
“ahead of its time” seems like an understatement.

So, that dart-shaped arrow…

…is also the arrow used in Google Maps turn-by-turn navigation to show your
current location. You can see it if you use directions in the app today. You
can see it in the [Google Maps Navigation launch blog post from
2009](https://web.archive.org/web/20091214013008/https://googleblog.blogspot.com/2009/10/announcing-
google-maps-navigation-for.html).

And what Edwards spotted is that the same Google Maps arrow was used by Etak
to show the current location of your car, way back then.

To give you an idea of how much 1985 was a different era: there were no GPS
satellites. So you had to put magnetic sensors in your wheels to count
rotations.

Map data was stored on audio cassette tapes in the back of the car!

The screen didn’t have pixels! It was a vector screen, with electron beams
painting lines on directly on the phosphors, like an oscilloscope.

So check out his article, because there’s a photo of the Etak Navigator, and
you can see the dart-arrow, right there in the mirror. So is that the origin?

Edwards goes further. In a follow-up article, he figured out the connection:

To Etak’s benefit, Catalyst’s shared office building encouraged the cross-
pollination of ideas between companies. Alcorn, while working at Cumma,
recalls being fascinated by the activities at Etak. During development, he
snuck into nearby Atari’s coin-op division building with Etak engineers to
show them the hit 1979 arcade title Asteroids. The game used a vector display
that produced fluid animations with low-cost hardware. It’s little surprise,
then, that _Etak’s final on-screen representation of the car in its shipping
product was a vector triangle nearly identical to the ship from Asteroids._

Asteroids? [Asteroids](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asteroids_(video_game)>)
_(Wikipedia)._ The break-out coin-op arcade game. The dart-arrow is the
spaceship, it’s right there!

_Thank you Benj, amazing research!_

btw: Benj has a new book out, a history of Nintendo’s OG virtual reality
gaming device, _Virtual Boy_ from 1995: [Seeing
Red](https://www.amazon.com/Seeing-Red-Nintendos-Virtual-
Platform/dp/0262045060/) _(Amazon)._

I think we can take another step back…

Before _Asteroids_ there was
[Spacewar!](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spacewar!) _(Wikipedia)._

_Spacewar_ was developed in 1962 for the PDP-1 – cost: $120k then, $1.2m in
today’s money, only 55 ever made.

_Spacewar_ was the first popular video game. (That is, it may not have been
the first graphical video game, but it was the first one popular enough to be
copied to other locations). It was played mainly illicitly… the PDP-1 was a
research computer, and the game was played after hours.

It’s a simulation of space combat between two ships: the needle and the wedge.

But it pointed at a new application of real-time computers. Brenda Laurel (in
_Computers as Theatre)_ observes that _Spacewar_ showed that

[the computer’s] interesting potential lay not in its ability to perform
calculations but in its capacity to _represent action in which humans could
participate._

Its popularity broke through: Stewart Brand wrote about _Spacewar_ [in Rolling
Stone magazine in 1972](https://www.labouseur.com/courses/gamesem/rolling-
stone-1972.pdf) _(pdf)._

Ready or not, computers are coming to the people. That’s good news, maybe the
best since psychedelics.

Brand used _Spacewar_ as a subcultural phenomenon to introduce what was going
on in those days with computing, and in particular at Xerox PARC. He got some
good quotes. Here’s one:

Alan Kay: “The game of Spacewar blossoms spontaneously wherever there is a
graphics display connected to a computer.”

And of course Stewart Brand, having [been present at the birth of personal
computing in 1968](/home/2021/05/05/strange_loop), went on to be the first
person to use "personal computer" in print (to mean the thing we mean today)
in 1974. [Here’s the Twitter thread where I asked
him.](https://x.com/genmon/status/1660533557511479296)

ANYWAY.

_Spacewar_ inspired _Asteroids._

So. While “the wedge” spaceship in _Spacewar_ isn’t visually identical to the
ship in _Asteroids,_ and therefore to Etak, and Google Maps, and the dart-
arrow that appears in the iPhone, there’s the ancestry.

**Update 21 May.** It turns out that Benj Edwards already dug into the
Asteroids-to-Spacewar connection – and he brings receipts.

“The ship was designed after the one in Spacewar!, which I played in 1971 at
the Stanford AI Lab, which I believe came from MIT,” wrote [Asteroids
designer] Logg in an email to How-To Geek. “I did not test any other shapes
for the ship.”

Actual proof! Amazing.

Edwards also got his hands on the _original pencil sketch_ of the Asteroids
ship. See it over at that article.

So here’s what I said to the students:

When you’re driving around in Google Maps, you’re piloting a spaceship in an
ancient simulation of space warfare.

That’s what I’m saying. And, like, does it _matter?_ Does the connection
_mean_ anything?

I tend to believe that it does matter, yes, that vibe _transmits_ somehow. A
chair made by a carpenter who sits badly will impart their twisted stance on
anyone who sits in it.

I can’t tell you exactly why I think it’s worth looking at, or what would have
been different had the original game been a digital Ouija Board or a virtual
loom or proto-Farmville.

And if we disagree on whether it matters then that’s worth talking about too!

Speculating on the counterfactuals, opening up whether it even matters, and
finding joy in the interconnectedness of all things – that’s what the talk
series is all about.

“Now” is never just a moment. The Long Now is the recognition that _the
precise moment you’re in grows out of the past and is a seed for the future._

The lecture series winds up in a meditation on the braided tendencies in
computing of collaboration and control. These idealistic moments - effective
and wrong-headed, we get both - in a technology that finds its evolution in
ugly periods and repeatedly tends towards population control… can we take
lessons from that, too?

Well. A story for another day.
