# The ASMR version of Bee Movie, and other neuro-divergent media

I haven’t talked about ASMR here before because it’s vaguely sexy and that
makes me uncomfortable to discuss in public, but it perhaps also hints at a
new wave of neurodivergent media, so let’s take that angle and pretend like
we’re being intellectual.

The _Washington Post_ covered “Autonomous Sensory Meridian Response” (ASMR)
back in 2018: [ASMR videos are edgy, unnerving and almost avant-garde. Is it
time to consider them
art?](https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/asmr-videos-are-edgy-
unnerving-and-almost-avant-garde-is-it-time-to-consider-them-
art/2018/11/06/4842bfb2-db97-11e8-b3f0-62607289efee_story.html)

The name sounds pilfered from a medical journal, but it’s basically Stuff That
Makes You Tingle – the catch in a husky voice, a knife drawn through sand, a
cat licking her paw, whatever sensuous ‘trigger,’ as ASMR folks call it, works
for you.

Those triggers? They are **sounds:** "finger flutters, whispering, slow
talking, slow talking while whispering, tapping, brushing, crinkling."

And ASMR has become _huge_ on YouTube over the years. Here are the two most
popular channels I can find.

Zach Choi’s estimated revenue: [$1.2 million per
month.](https://moneybuzzeuropa.com/youtuber-is-making-1m-monthly-from-eating-
in-front-of-the-camera/)

I get maybe _10 seconds_ into these videos before feeling sick. Hearing people
eat skeeves me out at the best of times, let alone captured by a close mic and
played directly into my Bose QC35s.

SUPER DISGUSTING. Let’s skip the food.

**Gibi** ([her Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gibi_ASMR), [her
YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCE6acMV3m35znLcf0JGNn7Q)) has 3
million subscribers and a billion (actually a billion) cumulative views.

Here’s an example for you to try: [Gibi clicking and
whispering](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x8HXsZJhW_s) (16m views).

The intention is that this carefully produced binaural sound has frequencies
that will trigger a kind of sensual cascade. [From
Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASMR): "a tingling sensation that
typically begins on the scalp and moves down the back of the neck and upper
spine."

What I can’t quite tell is whether ASMR is supposed to be real. I mean, it’s
nice?

Maybe ASMR is for some people the neurological equivalent of a hack, where you
visit a specially constructed webpage that breaks out of the browser sandbox,
tunnels down from the application executable to the system kernel, and
jailbreaks your phone; a sound sequence that buffer-overflows your auditory
cortex and starts writing random bits over your pleasure centres.

But I’m half convinced that it’s popular because it’s all just a bit sexy. The
ASMR articles I can find deny this vehemently, but ASMR videos are mainly
attractive young people, mainly young women, whispering in your ear, and
surely that’s why they have billions of views? I mean, isn’t it as simple as
that? And there’s an unspoken conspiracy to claim that it’s _“art”_ and
_“parasthesia”_ so that everybody can avoid admitting that they’re watching
hours of videos of young women slowly eating honeycomb in order to pass their
days in a state of being low-grade turned on?

Look: I will take ASMR at face value. If others say it’s real, it’s real.

ASMR is a legit cultural phenomenon, and it is no weirder to be microdosing
intimacy on YouTube than it is to get thrills out of sitting around with your
friends and watching 90 minutes of people in costumes hitting each other while
rousing music plays. Hollywood has normalised and industrialised violence and
emotional manipulation so pervasively that it’s hard to see it for what it is
any longer, and it is way stranger and more concerning to realise that there
are entire companies dedicated to filming people dressed up and pretending to
inflict hurt on each other, plus _special buildings_ to go and watch these
productions in, than it is for there to be people on online pro-am streaming
websites with expensive audio equipment acting like they’re cutting my hair.

ANYWAY.

Gibi and her 80 closest ASMR friends have banded together to make an ASMR
cover of Jerry Seinfeld’s _Bee Movie._

**[The ASMR Bee Movie](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WVcx29q3ey4)** (95
mins; premiered 27 Feb, 2021).

The entire thing is synced to the original _Bee Movie_ on Netflix, and the
intention is that you watch both, side by side.

_Incroyable._

There’s a lot of whispering and a certain amount of dressing up as bees.

I guess it’s like the zillennial version of listening to _The Dark Side of the
Moon_ from Pink Floyd while [synchronously viewing The Wizard of
Oz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dark_Side_of_the_Rainbow)? I remember being
17 and watching Arthur C Clarke’s [Fractals: The Colours of
Infinity](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DyeR19m8gGk) with a friend for, um,
pretty much a whole weekend. Same diff.

There’s a quote from Teller of the magicians Penn & Teller, in this long and
excellent profile:

Sometimes magic is just someone spending more time on something than anyone
else might reasonably expect.

And, beyond the sensory experience, there’s definitely some of that going on.
It must have taken a _lot_ of effort.

So I am in love with the ASMR _Bee Movie,_ and the fact that people have
created it gives me hope for the future.

Separately, and assuming ASMR is real in that some people don’t get it but
other people experience it intensely:

I feel like it’s healthy for us as a society to acknowledge that different
people have different subjective experiences of the world, and that there are
these neurological _tribes,_ if you like, who get their neurotransmitter
floods from different things: people who are wired to sort stuff into
categories, people who like videos of other people whispering at them,
adrenaline junkies who get off on jumping from high objects, and so on, and
having a vocabulary to understand and discuss these various neurotribes (and
the spectrum on which each exists) would benefit and build empathy for us all.

What if there were neurodivergent-optimised versions of all media?

Not just ASMR _Bee Movie_ but taciturn and slow-paced superhero movies, for
people who are easily overwhelmed, like French New Wave meets the Marvel
Cinematic Universe, or for completionists, speedrun Netflix Originals where
each episode is only 3 minutes and expunges narrative irrelevant to the
overall season arc, with everything fitting together neatly at the end.

An Apple Music radio station with all the tracks pitch-shifted down to barely-
audible infrasound so you’re listening to your favourite pop but every so
often it hits a tone that induces [a feeling of
ghosts](https://www.theguardian.com/science/2003/oct/16/science.farout) or
immediate and automatic [religious
ecstasy](http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/3087674.stm), as appropriate.

I’m just making personal requests at this point.
