# If my eyeballs are being resold to advertisers then it had better be worth my time

Ok let’s say you’ve got two physically identical factories. One is doing
better than the other – how do you characterise the difference?

The delta might be Marx’s concept of [general
intellect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_intellect) _(Wikipedia):_ "a
combination of technological expertise and social intellect." The machines are
the same, the processes are the same, the inputs are the same. What varies is
how well people get to know the quirks of the tools and develop their skills
of cooperation, and that overall ability is something we get for free as
humans because we are social, intellectual animals.

_(Look I don’t understand Marx very well, I know. I’m cribbing badly from an
amazing talk I saw years ago by the philosopher Adam Arvidsson – here’s a
draft of chapter 2 of his book[The Ethical
Economy](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Ethical-Economy-Rebuilding-Value-
Crisis/dp/0231152647/) (Amazon): [Ethics and General
Intellect](https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Ethics_and_General_Intellect).)_

General intellect - people’s skilled cooperative productivity - can walk out
the door so one way of reading industrial history is that you make the
processes and tools so specific that it is bound to a single factory.

And actually there’s always this tussle over who owns the value of general
intellect - capital or labour, right - and you can see internet platforms in a
similar way. What was the value of Instagram when it sold for a billion
dollars? It wasn’t the tech, and it probably wasn’t the ad dollars (although
Facebook realised that was a way of extracting value): it was this community
of practice that was effective at growing itself. You can’t build that
directly, maybe you shouldn’t be able to _own_ that, and yet that was what the
founders sold in the acquisition. (I [wrote about the Instagram
acquisition](/home/2012/04/11/instagram_as_an_island_economy) through this
lens back in 2012.)

Now imagine two social media networks, microblogging platforms if you like.
One is vibrant and growing and one isn’t. The difference, possibly, is the
effectiveness of the general intellect.

It’s not just ownership and appropriation of general intellect.

One read on the history of the internet is that it’s the history of startups
figuring out how to wrap their arms around something and turn it into value
before anyone else realises that there was even value there to begin with.

_(And, as it happens, this" vampiric" nature was the topic of the talk by
Arvidsson that I attended way back in 2006. [Here are my raw
notes.](/notes/2006/06/reboot8/day1.txt).)_

AI training data for example.

Like GitHub Copilot, [WHICH I LOVE](/home/2023/01/27/copilot) and couldn’t
work without, but let’s be clear it is trained on the source code of open
source software, and at least some of that software would not have granted
that permission in their license had anyone thought of it ahead of time.

But who knew you could train an AI from the free-to-view patterns in bulk code
as passed through a wood-chipper and reassembled with uh _math,_ the abilities
of said AI being something that you could then charge rent for?

ANYWAY so there’s the YouTube generosity superstar _MrBeast._

e.g. MrBeast a.k.a. Jimmy Donaldson arranged many free cataract surgeries and
filmed the result. "The end product was an eight-minute video called “1,000
Blind People See for the First Time.”" – 152 million views. [Here’s his
channel.](https://www.youtube.com/@MrBeast)

Audience means ad revenue which is recycled into bigger giveaways means
content means audience, etc. What a flywheel.

Donaldson has built a YouTube empire on this kind of quasi philanthropy, in
which he crafts spectacles around surprise cash giveaways (“Giving a Random
Homeless Man $10,000”), contests with expensive prizes (“Last to Leave
$800,000 Island Keeps It”) and other lavish, if not particularly sensible,
gifts (“Tipping Waitresses With Real Gold Bars”).

_([Here’s a paywall-dodging link.](https://archive.ph/Oy10l))_

ASIDE:

I mean, buy a lottery ticket or tidy MrBeast’s chocolate bars?

The random-yet-efficacious cause-and-effect is simultaneously how one trains a
dolphin, and also the end point of this give-and-take evolutionary cascade is
how we end up with gods. Capricious benevolent variable-interval operant
conditioning gods that you pray to (or tweet at) for intervention re your
cataracts. Gods or billionaires, same same.

BUT, this is not my point.

From that article I learned of the concept of the **audience commodity.**

Vincent Miller, from the media studies department at the University of Kent in
the UK:

“The interesting thing that he was doing was saying: ‘You don’t have to give
up anything. _All you have to do is watch._ And I make so much money from each
one of you who views these things.’“

And so!

Miller’s interest in MrBeast resulted in a new academic paper, written with
Eddy Hogg, in which Miller places MrBeast in the context of a media-studies
concept called the “audience commodity,” _the idea that media consumption is
essentially a form of labor,_ because people spend time creating a valuable
commodity - an audience - that is then sold to advertisers.

Well!

If media consumption is labour then what is the equivalent of minimum wage?

So let’s accept that this is a generally applicable result, and viewers/users
are engaged in the labour of building a valuable, being _audience commodity,_
in exchange for the reward of consuming entertaining media (which might be
sharing photos or watching TV, whatever it is).

Do users see themselves as workers?

Reddit users do – the mods recently went on strike.

Do users see media consumption as compensation, analogous to wages? That’s
where my minimum wage equivalency angle comes in.

A minimum wage is put in place to ensure that workers are given fair exchange
for their labour, and also to prevent any “race to the bottom” dynamic as
inter-company competition pushes for lower and lower compensation.

I’m not sure how you assess the actual _value_ of media consumption though.

Maybe via a tribunal? They could assess it, just the same as that committee
that sets age ratings on movies. They would set a minimum level of being
entertained/other value. Too boring? Not equitable in the building of audience
commodity! You are taking unfair advantage of your users! Back to the App
Store! Try again!

Or a minimum level of being _fulfilled._

See, it’s hard to assess the compensation value of dopamine pump Skinner
boxes. If you find a mobile game addictive, is that true audience value you
are receiving, or some kind of fairy-glamoured fake gold that turns to dry
leaves by the next morning?

It is hard to do the assessment.

So I’ve been wondering how to assay the true value of consumed media, and all
I can think of is deathbed regrets. People seem to have some kind of special
clear-eyed retrospective judgement on how they’ve spent their minutes,
approaching the end.

Let’s build on that!

What you would do is to run AI simulations of whole populations, exposed to
this particular media.

Then ask the sims on their virtual deathbeds whether or not they felt they had
wasted their lives. In contributing to the audience commodity of _Candy
Crush,_ you would ask, in that particular labour exchange, say, looking back
at it all, your whole span, how self-actualised do you feel? One to five
stars.

The percentage of self-adjudicated wasted lives is then inversely proportional
to value in labour value exchange.

If the level of regret is too high, then the media itself is a waste of time.
People are being exploiting for their time spent building the media owner’s
audience commodity. Ban it.

Also fingers crossed that the AI populations that we use for such mass
automated assessment don’t possess sentience.

Done.
