# Post at 13.35, on Thursday 13 Jan 2011

[Autom is a robot weight-loss
coach:](http://www.intuitiveautomata.com/autom_intro.html "Video here.")
"Autom has a short conversation with you every day to help you keep track of
your eating and exercise quickly and simply. She provides feedback, advice,
and encouragement to keep you motivated."

Let's be blunt. It's a touchscreen interface to answer multiple choice
questions about whether you've exercised or not, and for how long, and it
adapts day by day to encourage you to lose weight. Only the screen is in the
belly of a tiny robot with robot speech, and massive blue eyes which blink and
wink slightly too slowly.

It's remarkable the difference the face makes. If Autom were an iPhone app, it
would have to be like filling in a little form every day. But because it's a
little robot, there's license for the interface to be conversational. It can
ask you questions in a different order, request you to return the next day
(and you'll feel bad if you don't!). A conversational interface can make
suggestions where a conventional one can't.

(Healthcare's an interesting space.
[GlowCaps](http://www.vitality.net/glowcaps.html "Glowing medicine bottle
tops.") are medicine bottle tops that light up and play a tune when it's time
to take your pills. Because they're connected to the internet, they can join
up to larger services: you can have a cash incentive to complete your
prescription, or work to achieve challenges in a game, or just an email to a
family member if you forget. The market is insurance companies, not pill-
takers. They'll pay for it because it's in their interest to keep you healthy.
Autom and GlowCaps are "ubicomp" - ubiquitous computing - without being
computing. They're helpful coaches first, and only secondarily
technology/robots/magically connected devices.)
