# Why you should watch Big’s Backyard Ultra, which starts tomorrow

I am going to try to convince you to spend the next 4 days watching a YouTube
live stream of people running round a 4.1 mile loop in Tennessee, all day and
all night.

[Big’s Backyard Ultra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big%27s_Backyard_Ultra)
_(Wikipedia)_ starts tomorrow, Saturday 21 October.

Ok – I’ve never run a marathon, let alone an ultramarathon: a distance greater
than 26 miles. I am a frequently injured, _currently_ injured runner, but not
that kind of distance. So I’m very much a spectator here.

A _“backyard ultra”_ is an ultramarathon format with simple rules:

This means that if someone wins at 60 yards, somebody else has to make it to 59.

There are backyard ultra races all over the world. They act as qualifiers for
Big’s. Big’s is the original, started in 2011, and also where the world
championships happen.

The Individual World Championships are once every 2 years (this is the race
that’s starting soon).

I was _hooked_ on the previous one in 2021. The winner was Harvey Lewis. Lewis
ran 85 yards, or to put it another way: 354 miles in 3 days, 13 hours.

The world record is 102 yards and set earlier this year in Australia. I didn’t
watch that. I _did_ catch the 2022 World Team Championships. The races are
streamed on YouTube as a combination of handheld cameras and trail cams. Much
of the footage is in silence or in the dark. Two runners went head-to-head
from 86 yards to 101 yards - breaking the 100 loop barrier for the first time
– then both retired out together.

The inventor of the format is Lazarus Lake. Big is the name of his pit bull
who naps under the scoring table. Backyard ultras took off during the pandemic
lockdowns because you can do it, well, in your backyard. There was a
distributed international championship.

There’s a great article from a competitor at Big’s back in the 2015, in Trail
Runner magazine.

“There he is! First-place runner right there!” The joke goes on for hours. It
seems to get funnier to them each time they repeat it.

But the more loops I run, the more I realize it’s not a joke. It’s the core
truth of this entire race. Everyone really is in first place until they drop.
Whether you finish your loop in 44 minutes or 59 minutes, if you’re still
running, you’re still winning. There is no strategy. My brain starts to death-
spiral, as I realize that no matter how hard I work, I’ll always be in first
place, like everyone else. Time is a flat circle.

Another quote: "It’s as fascinating and as terrible a race as will ever be
dreamed up."

So the runners seem to plumb deeper truths the further in they get.

Lazarus Lake too.

During Big’s, Lake stays awake and each hour posts increasingly gnomic
commentary on his Facebook page. It’s like he simultaneously punishes and
loves the runners. He speaks in aphorisms about human capability.

Another quote from that article, this one about Lake’s Facebook updates: "Each
reads like the beautiful poetry of a sadistic Thoreau."

if we did this to dogs,  
they would throw us in jail.

it is one thing to run a 100,  
and start once.  
it is another to run a 100,  
and have to start 24 times…

It takes someone special. Though we - us, the runners - are all people.

Because, for me, that’s the draw of watching backyard ultras.

In a way, long-distance endurance running is what humans are made for.
Physiologically this ability is why we’re special. David Attenborough
documented the persistence hunting of the San people in the Kalahari Desert:
[the Intense 8 Hour Hunt](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=826HMLoiE_o) _(BBC
Earth, YouTube)._

Beyond fitness, race strategy, and calorie math, these runners need _will._ It
would be so easy to just stop. Or sit down for a minute longer. After a couple
of days they’re seeing things.

So when I’m watching Big’s on YouTube, I’m seeing humans who possess
extraordinary fitness and also extraordinary will. They’re right at the limit,
probing that boundary. Every time a backyard record is broken, they’re
establishing _new ground_ for human potential.

The BBC did a retrospective on the 2020 season. It, too, is packed with weird
truths from the competitors.

“It’s like being punched in the face,” chuckles Cantrell from his kitchen via
Zoom. “Not hard, just a little bit. But you do it again, and again, and
again.”

And:

“He gets called a sadist and that he likes people to suffer, but he’s not like
that,” says 31-year-old Karel Sabbe, the Belgian dentist who is also among the
99% of non-finishers at Barkley. “He gets the best out of people. He wants
everybody to have the opportunity to face their own limits.”

"I love him deeply," says another runner.

And:

“It’s really dangerous to think,” says Steene. Dauwalter describes it as
running in “robot zone”. Proctor says: “We’re crippled by the past and the
future. What’s happening in the next 10 seconds is all that I can control.”

And:

Steene couldn’t stave off hallucinations - trees and bushes took the shape of
dinosaurs and giants - while Guterl saw severed heads and heard growling in
the woods.

And:

It is all relative for Proctor, who has an app on his phone called WeCroak,
which tells him five times a day how long he has left to live - as a reminder
not to waste his life. “The chair that you’re sitting in right now - is that
comfortable? Go and run 50 loops of a 4.17-mile course, then sit down in that
chair and I’ll ask you if it’s comfortable.

It’s a fantastic article and great introduction:

[Big Dog’s Backyard Ultra: The toughest, weirdest race you’ve never heard of
(2021)](https://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/56720358) _(BBC Sport)._

So [here are the 50 runners](https://backyardultra.com/2023-world-individual-
championship-roster/) for the Individual World Championships at Big’s Backyard
Ultra, starting tomorrow. They’ve qualified from all over the world over the
past 2 years.

[Watch a trailer for the race](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yJAvnhXrJMM)
_(YouTube)._

[Watch Lazarus Lake preview the
race](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q7DffW4nOhc&t=326s) _(YouTube)_ – he
talks about what the trail is like and what makes backyard ultras particularly
difficult.

Phil Gore, who holds the world record at 103 yards, is racing. The two last-
standing runners in the team championships in 2022, at 101 yards, are also
both racing.

The first couple of days, you can drop in and out of watching. Day three,
you’ll become astounded that people are still running. You’ll get to know the
characters, root for them, be gobsmacked at their capability. If the runners
get through a fourth day again, I guarantee you’ll be hooked, watching for 10
minutes at the top of each and every hour, waking up in the night to check
your phone. Waiting to see if the scope of human possibility has been
enlarged.

I never quite know where best to look for updates. This is where I’ll be
looking to follow along:

I think what makes it accessible to watch is that I can imagine running a
single yard.

4 miles in an hour? I do that on a Saturday without thinking about it, running
errands in my neighbourhood.

A second yard? A third? I can do a half marathon with some training. In three
hours? Sure, easy. How much further could I imagine going? I once raced 20
miles over four loops. So, slower than that, the same again maybe. Outside
single digits? Probably not actually. I’ve never tested my limit but I really
imagine not.

When I’m watching these runners race their 10th, or 20th, or 100th, I know
that they have arrived somewhere - through physical endurance and mental will

- that I could not, but simultaneously I know that it’s just one more loop,
  and that fact I can picture and feel and connect with in my legs.
