# Baking life lessons and musings on metabolism

Bread is bread. But it also gives me a chance to reflect on how to approach
learning.

I’m pretty pleased with how my baking has progressed since the beginning of
the pandemic. (For reference: [May
2020](https://www.instagram.com/p/CAdge1WpGEN/) vs [March
2021](https://www.instagram.com/p/CMNpiM_JZFU/).)

I’ve made a bunch of tweaks since I started. To catalogue them…

**Dependability.** These are all about having the same result for the same
effort.

Because the dough is now the same every single time, insulated from variables
such as room temperature and yeast happiness, it’s possible to think about
tweaking the process.

**Fine tuning.** It wouldn’t be possible to tweak except that the variability
of the dough has been reduced.

I include these figures because it’s insane that they should make a noticeable
difference, given the “noise” inherent in home cooking. And yet they do!

**Tips.** I now include two extra steps in baking.

**Technique.** These have been gradual improvements.

What I find fascinating is that I never intended to improve my technique in
these areas. It just… happened. I could not do them at all only 10 months ago.

I remember learning to drive when I was 17 and something similar happened. I
would sit there, chatting to my instructor (hi Colin), and meanwhile my body
would drive the car. Over time, my body’s ability to drive improved – but I’m
not sure I consciously did _anything._ I was just along for the ride (sorry).

So there’s something about “embodied learning” that I find mysterious and
simultaneously exciting: So long as I repeatedly _perform_ something, my body
will get better at it, if it can.

There are three general life lessons I take from baking.

You would think that the metabolism lesson wouldn’t be generally applicable in
life. Except that I was looking up an asthma medication the other day, and it
acts to produce such-and-such a protein, which is does by mucking around with
such-and-such metabolic reaction, by producing such-and-such precursor – and
when you look it up, it turns out that St. John’s wort performs the exact same
function.

So now I am (a) enlightened re: traditional medicines, and (b) intrigued re:
the possibilities of personalised medicine.

What I’d like to see is the entire, standard metabolic map for humans, every
reaction and pathway traced, like a circuit diagram. Not earth’s whole
ecosystem (which I do have a poster of) but humans only, isolated. Think of
this like the molecular biochemistry equivalent of the Human Genome Project,
or the [Human Connectome
Project](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_Connectome_Project) for the
brain.

And then, for an individual human, a way to measure the performance of the
personal circuitry.

To perform the measurements: Perhaps precursor compounds could be ingested or
injected, then metabolised and surveyed, in a series of diagnostic experiments
lasting a week or so. You would end up with a calibrated schematic, and you
could use it for debugging personal health.

So you could say things like: oh, this person is predisposed to asthma because
such-and-such enzyme is underrepresented in these particular cellular
factories, perhaps there’s a genetic factor but we don’t care, and that’s
because there’s something upstream on the pathway which is over-synthesising
some other compound entirely, not leaving enough building block molecules, so
you need a take a pill with these exact vitamins every morning to suppress X
and boost Y.
