# The pedagogy of toddler ballet

I say ballet, but the lessons we go to with our 2.5 year old on Saturday
mornings are exactly the kind of event you’d expect with toddlers – an
instructor fruitlessly leading the group through a series of exercises while
the kids watch, wave, charge about, and very occasionally sort of join in.
There’s very little ballet going on. EXCEPT:

There’s a song at the beginning where you move your head and arms. Clearly
that’s warming up.

There are the physical and (interestingly) the psychological atoms of ballet
itself. Like: tip-toeing, a game that includes jumping, and also taking it in
turns to walk into the centre of the circle and wave to the entire class.
That’s the seedling of a solo, right there.

There’s structure which I imagine is common to every ballet class ever. The
instructor is called Miss S–. At the end, everyone curtsies (or at least is
asked to). A [reverence](https://www.liveabout.com/definition-of-
reverence-1006847).

But my favourite exercises are those that are about establishing the
communications protocol. The song “Head, shoulders, knees and toes” comes up
every lesson. Then there’s also a song with maracas where the kids shake up
and down, side to side, and into the circle and away from the circle. Cardinal
directions!

Being able to accurately reference a body part and a direction is the
foundation for high bandwidth communication and rapport between teacher the
student. The trick is that the teacher can reference desired behaviour at a
distance.

So these seem like important categories to exercise in any new group, such as
a work team, coaching relationship, or perhaps even a user with software:

It’s interesting to see how the skeleton of the mental model that will one day
become ballet is already being developed, even from the first lesson.
