# Banksy, invention, and the six steps

Banksy does all that [outdoor stencil
art](http://www.banksy.co.uk/outdoors/index.html). He [started work between
1990-1994,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banksy) and switched to stencilling
in 2000. That his style has become so imitated is a signal to me that what he
started was something new, if not in the medium (stencilling isn’t new, and
nor is graffiti), but in the binding between his medium and his message.

There’s a story Banksy tells about discovering stencils as related in his book
_Wall And Piece_ and [repeated in this
article:](http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-1034538/Graffiti-artist-
Banksy-unmasked---public-schoolboy-middle-class-suburbia.html)

"I spent one night trying to paint LATE AGAIN in big silver bubble letters on
the side of a passenger train. British Transport Police showed up and I got
ripped to shreds running away through a thorny bush. The rest of my mates made
it to the car and disappeared so I spent over an hour hidden under a dumper
truck with engine oil leaking all over me."

"As I lay there listening to the cops on the tracks, I realised I had to cut
my painting time in half or give up altogether. _I was staring straight up at
the stencilled plate on the bottom of a fuel tank when I realised I could just
copy that style and make each letter 3ft high._"

"I got home at last and crawled into bed next to my girlfriend. I told her I’d
had an epiphany that night and she told me to stop taking that drug ‘cos it’s
bad for your heart."

In Scott McCloud’s [Understanding
Comics](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Understanding_Comics) \- which is
excellent, go read it - McCloud puts forward a theory of artistic creation
consisting of six steps, steps he likens to an apple. Surface is the skin.
Idea/Purpose is the core.

[Here are McCloud’s steps:](http://www.flickr.com/photos/ebb/6993782871/)

(cf. [Duffy/Brand’s shearing layers of
change,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shearing_layers) for buildings: site;
structure; skin; services; space plan; stuff.)

In the subsequent pages McCloud tells the story of an artist learning by
starting at step 6, and working their way back - with effort - to step 3.
Beyond step 3, there is a choice: "does the artist want to say something about
life _through_ his art or does he want to say something about _art itself._"
Choosing the second route, step 2, the artist becomes an “explorer.” Choosing
the first, step 1, the artist uses art as a tool.

Banksy, I think, invented at step 3. The proof is in the train epiphany
anecdote: the story he wanted to tell forced him to do something different.
Stencils leapt from somewhere else into graffiti, and the electric arc went
via the kite-in-the-thunderstorm of Banksy’s eyes. Subsequent stencil artists
may or may not have better structure, craft or surface, but they didn’t invent
at step 3.

I’m not going make a judgement whether doing what Banksy did is “better” or
not. I don’t believe which steps an artist (or creator) operate in has much
relation to “better” or value. But maybe the six steps are one way into to
talking about all of this stuff. The breakdown provokes interesting questions:
when and where should invention occur, in multiple places or one at a time;
what is the interaction between invention and culture and time; how these
steps would look when distributed across an organisation including all kinds
of people.
