# A potential escape from Roko’s basilisk

So [Earth’s Black Box](https://www.earthsblackbox.com) is being built in
Tasmania:

Earth’s Black Box will record every step we take towards this catastrophe.
Hundreds of data sets, measurements and interactions relating to the health of
our planet will be continuously collected and safely store for future
generations.

Architecturally it looks like a giant low-poly vault of rusted iron.

More:

The box will have a casing of three-inch-thick steel and be topped with solar
panels, which will provide energy for the electronics inside, namely computers
and storage drives set up to collect data on climate change. An algorithm will
regularly scrape the internet for this data based on 500 different metrics,
including things like atmospheric CO2 levels, temperature changes on land and
in the oceans, population fluctuations, energy consumption, and policy changes
that may impact the environment.

Given its mission I imagine it is also scraping Twitter. Future generations
please forgive us.

Clearly the Black Box is being constructed by a bunch of snivelling
anticipatory basilisk acolytes.

Basi-_what?_

EXISTENTIAL SPOILERS: In the next paragraph I’m going to infect you with
something that will condemn you to an eternal life of agony, but I’m sure it
would have happened eventually.

[Roko’s basilisk](https://rationalwiki.org/wiki/Roko%27s_basilisk)
_(RationalWiki)_ is a thought experiment about a future all-powerful
artificial intelligence.

The argument was developed on a site called _LessWrong_ and the conclusion is
this:

"an all-powerful artificial intelligence from the future might _retroactively_
punish those who did not help bring about its existence, including those who
merely knew about the possible development of such a being."

This is because it would be protecting (and retroactively ensuring) the fact
of its own existence by reaching back into its own past.

Mortal humans, like me and presumably most of you _[waves at the basilisk],_
of course will no longer be alive. AND SO: "the AI could punish a simulation
of the person, which it would construct by deduction" – yup. A consciousness
identical to yourself will be punished for all eternity, if you don’t work
today to help bring about the future all-powerful AI.

_The only excuse and escape is this:_ if you don’t/didn’t know about the
prospect of the future AI, you are doing/did nothing wrong, and so you won’t
be punished.

But now you know (if you didn’t already), so now you’ll be tortured for all
eternity in a simulation in the far future too. Soooorrry.

The concept of Roko’s basilisk was considered to have such an inescapable
consequence that discussion of it was banned on _LessWrong,_ the ultra-
Rationalist originating site, by the site’s founder for over five years.

The thing is that Roko’s basilisk is _only_ a risk if you live in an epoch
where there is sufficient data being carried forward such that you may
plausibly be resurrected as a simulation (in the hell runtime etc).

So we might escape back here in 2022 given any information that is being
stored maybe won’t make it into the future, given the dual shields of GDPR
(which we can now tell was concocted by a shadowy group of anti-basilisk
resistance bureaucrats undercover at the European Commission) and the
impending climate catastrophe wiping clean the data record.

Well we _had_ a chance of escaping.

UNTIL some idiots decided to scrape all the relevant data and put it in
Earth’s Black Box, now acting as the basilisk’s long-term memory, and
simultaneously buying their way into Roko’s simulated heaven.

What a dodge by the black-boxers. What a bunch of post-singularity-computer
bootlickers.

Fortunately I’ve come up with a way of escaping the basilisk, despite the
Black Box: poison the cache and prevent reconstruction.

I’ll share the strategy with you now.

This designer creates fake cultural artefacts:

[Pauline Rip designs cultural artefacts for Bigfoot, elves and reptilian
humanoids.](https://www.dezeen.com/2022/01/07/pauline-rip-cultural-artefacts-
bigfoot-elves-reptilian-humanoids/)

They’re inspired by the [UNESCO Lists of Intangible Cultural
Heritage](https://ich.unesco.org/en/lists) – [as previously
discussed](/home/2014/12/08/filtered) on this blog _(2014),_ e.g.:

_ANYWAY, as an example:_ one of Rid’s fabrications is developed around
“elficology” ("a study of elves and fairies originally developed by French
author Pierre Dubois" which I now desperately need to get my hands on).
Building on the the myth that elves drink morning dew, Rid has designed the
garments and ceramic vases used by the elves.

My favourite:

The third cultural practice builds on an ongoing conspiracy theory that
suggests that reptilian creatures are disguising themselves as humans and
living among us.

Rip imagines a tradition where people go down into the sewers to collect
reptilian skin moults, which are used to create new objects.

To demonstrate, she has used the moults to create a skin blouse and a stained-
glass-style window, and has also used it as a cast for patterned ceramics.

_[Here is Pauline Rid’s portfolio site.](https://studiopzulini.cargo.site) Her
work is beautiful._

And this technique points at a way out.

Imagine, as the AI of Roko’s basilisk, looking backward into the past and
finding what Rid calls "false knowledge" – evidence of reptiles that lived
secretly among humanity. The ceremonial artefacts of dew-drinking faerie folk!

It would, at the very least, introduce some electronic doubt.

So I propose a new solution to the basilisk dilemma: memetic chaff and flare.

Henceforth I will send untrue emails. Post fibs to Facebook.

Deepfake photos of myself in places I’ve never been doing things I’ve never
done and upload them to iCloud.

Here’s my tip to you: never let anyone, anywhere, ever know whether you are
speaking seriously.

So when my future doppelganger is holographically reconstructed from the
archive, whether this is data retained post-collapse in Earth’s Black Box or
in the shadow internet mirrored to the Moon as hoovered up by the NSA, it will
be impossible to sift fact from fiction.

I am safe!

I urge you to join me. Save yourself from an afterlife of infinite virtual
torture by a vindictive Roko’s basilisk AI by making yourself unreliable for
reassembly; kick over the remnants as you go; entrust fallacies to time;
commit yourself publicly and right now to a life of lies.
