# Superheroes create cultural acceptance for popular oligarchy

I wonder whether the worldview from the 1930s has been transmitted via
superheroes through time, and has been re-imprinted onto today’s culture.

When Batman was created in 1939 the name will have had a double meaning:
[batman is a military
role](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Batman_(military)>), a soldier assigned
to be an aide to an officer, with roles including:

Use Google Books to [search for
“batman”](https://books.google.com/ngrams/graph?content=batman&year_start=1800&year_end=2019&corpus=28&smoothing=3&direct_url=t1%3B%2Cbatman%3B%2Cc0):
the term hits a peak in the early 1930s (before the comic book character) and
doesn’t climb to the same level of popularity again till 2004.

So Batman is a pun.

I can only imagine that readers would have been aware of this. Batman-the-hero
is working in the dark, doing the dirty work for Gotham, cleaning it up, just
as batman-the-wartime-aide would be up before dawn getting things ready,
dispensing of tasks before the officer wakes, doing the running behind the
scenes.

Batman as servant to the city.

Even if this wasn’t _explicit_ the semiotics are unavoidable – but will have
changed over time. I wonder how the depiction of Batman evolved, in the comic,
once a new generation of writers took the helm and the military term “batman”
lost its wartime currency. Did the servant aspect disappear? Or is it still
there under the surface?

OTHER SUPERHERO ORIGINS:

Alan Moore (writer of _Watchmen,_ _V for Vendetta,_ etc) makes the connection
between comic book superheroes and fascism.

From [this 2017 interview](https://alanmooreworld.blogspot.com/2019/11/moore-
on-jerusalem-eternalism-anarchy.html):

While these characters were originally perfectly suited to stimulating the
imaginations of their twelve or thirteen year-old audience, _today’s
franchised ubermenschen,_ aimed at a supposedly adult audience, seem to be
serving some kind of different function, and fulfilling different needs.
Primarily, mass-market superhero movies seem to be abetting an audience who do
not wish to relinquish their grip on (a) their relatively reassuring
childhoods, or (b) the relatively reassuring 20th century.

Nietzsche’s [concept of the
Ubermensch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%9Cbermensch) (1883) -
translated: “superman” - became a Nazi ideal.

Moore continues:

I would also remark that save for a smattering of non-white characters (and
non-white creators) these books and these iconic characters are still very
much white supremacist dreams of the master race. In fact, I think that a good
argument can be made for D.W. Griffith’s _Birth of a Nation_ as the first
American superhero movie, and the point of origin for all those capes and
masks.

[The Birth of a Nation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Birth_of_a_Nation)
_(Wikipedia)_ was a 1915 America epic film, hugely successful, and
"acknowledged as an inspiration for the rebirth of the Ku Klux Klan, which
took place only a few months after its release."

I mean…

Is this a reach?

OR:

Is Moore making a statement about the unconscious cultural origins of the
comic book superhero, the effects of which ripple on today?

_Let’s take Moore seriously for a minute._

Let’s say that the idea of the Ubermensch and the KKK fall out of the same
belief matrix, being this: that there is a _hierarchy_ to the ability and the
worth of human beings.

This belief comes and goes. Today’s “woke” culture (a badge to be worn with
pride!) is anti these kind of hierarchies. But sometimes is fashionable. For
example in the 1890s: H. G. Wells was "like many progressives of his time, a
believer in eugenics" _([source: The New
Yorker](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2011/10/17/utopian-pessimist))._

And it will have been in the air in the 1930s (the Nazis didn’t appear from
empty air).

Then when superheroes were created that same decade, _Birth of a Nation_ and
KKK had established in culture a convenient visual language: apex humans,
prepared to put their necks on the line for the rest of us, would forge their
own identities with masks and capes. So it makes sense to draw the new
supermen the same way.

Ok.

If this holds, _if,_ does it matter?

I think origins do matter, yes.

ASIDE: ANOTHER SUPERMAN IS POSSIBLE.

The ubermensch isn’t _necessarily_ fascist. There’s another way the story
could have been told.

The comic book superhero is always someone special: an alien orphan, a
traumatised billionaire, a genius transformed by radioactivity.

Compare this to John Campbell’s _“competent man”_ archetype, from 1950s sci-
fi, which I mentioned [back in October](/home/2021/10/28/bond): "The
“competent man” is the idea that there is nothing necessarily special or
unique about the protagonist. Instead they are smart, clear-eyed,
scientifically-minded, and, well, capable."

_(If you’ve seen/read ‘The Martian’ then Mark Watney is the epitome of the
competent man.)_

The competent man is _also_ ubermensch-y, it’s true, but it shows how
differently the comic book hero could have gone:

Whereas there can be only one Superman, and it is very definitely _not_ the
reader, the idea of the competent man is that this is a role _fully
accessible_ to the reader. That could be me, imagines the reader, if only I
can be smart and level-headed enough.

(Though it continues to be white, male, individualistic.)

What I mean to say that the creators of the superhero could have plotted a
different course.

What does the current popularity of comic book superheroes, in culture, do?

It reinforces the idea of a hierarchy of human, with the ubermensch as its
apex.

The superhero makes things alright without being asked. It looks after us, it
protects, it cleans up the streets. It’s a parental role. (And, to Moore’s
point, we’ve got these parental superheroes at the same time as we’ve
basically got [tech startups that do what our parents did for
us](/home/2016/02/22/filtered): drive us places, give us food, fulfil whims on
demand.)

It says that the superhero is someone _other_ – it ain’t us. And that’s a good
thing, it says.

Put like this, it seems like the concept of the superhero is softening us up
for a popular oligarchy: an unattainable class of humanity which is super-
wealthy with super abilities, and _somehow championed by the rest of us?_

Now I’m not saying that a popular oligarchy equals fascism. But, [reading
Umberto Eco’s 14 features of
fascism](https://www.openculture.com/2016/11/umberto-eco-makes-a-list-of-
the-14-common-features-of-fascism.html), the two systems do rhyme.

So that closes the loop. The origins of the comic book superhero, returned.

Could you have the cultural acceptance of Elon Musk without the superhero Tony
Stark?

All of which is to say two things:

I sometimes imagine a chair made by someone who sits all twisted. Sitting in
that chair yourself, you couldn’t help but to sit in the same way.

When a designer designs an object, their stance will be encoded and
transmitted to the user. Imposed.

Is _culture_ really passed on like this, not just with chairs or superheroes,
but in a general sense?

Does it matter? e.g. does it matter that modern computing interfaces and the
internet have their origin story in military money responding to situations
seen with military eyes chasing military solutions? If it does, what should we
do about it?

Maybe a fascist worldview is a memetic pandemic, one which blows up every few
generations, for whatever dynamical system reasons, just as the Spanish Flu
appeared in 1918 and a hundred years later we’ve got all of this.
