# Beaches are for people who enjoy the bureaucracy of going to the beach

I am on a lakeside beach in northern Italy contemplating the clerical effort
of being on the beach. Clerical as in administrative not ecclesiastical.

The packing, sure. Identifying the necessary equipment of clothes, whether
beach shoes will be required, if a windbreak is necessary, games for the
beach, games for the water, sunblock, towels, cool box, and so on. But packing
is involved in everything.

Mainly: at the beach:

Ferrying from the car. Identifying a site, setting up base with towels,
getting things out of bags, dressing, applying sunblock, putting different
things back into bags, inflating inflatables.

When should we go for lunch? Does anyone want a drink? Someone will have to
look after the bags. Or should we take the bags? There’s a fox a chicken and a
bag of grain and now we want an ice cream so you go first and take the fox
then leave the chicken but swap them with a soft-serve in a cornet with a
flake.

Periodically moving the sun beds to remain in the (a) sun or (b) shade (delete
as applicable).

Eventually going in the water.

There’s a lot involved.

I know people who are more practiced at going to and being at the beach, and
you would imagine that this would mean a smooth and swift establishing camp
and securing supply lines, but it turns out that complexity just increases,
and there’s more cargo and more beach architecture, such that a swift splash
around in the middle of the day is bookended by great logistical feats in
unpacking and then the same in reverse.

I suggest that they enjoy it.

While I am trudging through the bureaucracy of applying SPF-50 and towers-of-
Hanoi-ing my belongings to avoid filling my shirt with sand or getting pebbles
in my shoes, circling the beds again and again to arrange them for optimum
access to (a) sun or (b) shade (delete as before), picking up a book then
diverted by needing to get something from a bag, diverted because someone
needs a towel, a deep stack nested diversions all incomplete, oh now it’s time
to move the beds again/reapply sunblock/and so on, and all I _really_ want is
a paddle and then an ice cream, the baroque performance that _I_ regard as
time-consuming drudge work interfering with and merely in support of my time
at the beach, _they_ regard these exercises as the actual point of being here.

The identification and eradication of clerical busywork was what led to the
invention of the modern computing.

J C R Licklider, 1960, who, based on this insight, went on to fund Douglas
Engelbart’s project in which he and his team invented the personal computer,
[as previously discussed](/home/2022/11/04/somaforming):

About 85 per cent of my “thinking” time was spent getting into a position to
think … my “thinking” time was devoted mainly to activities that were
essentially clerical or mechanical: searching, calculating, plotting,
transforming, determining the logical or dynamic consequences of a set of
assumptions or hypotheses, preparing the way for a decision or an insight.

Preparing the way to get my gosh-darn feet in the gosh-darn lake, more like.

Yet who has more fun at the beach?

Me, unpracticed here, eyes on the distant prize, resentful of the continuous
bureaucracy, considering ways to eliminate it?

Or that chap over there sitting paddling on his paddle board with - I’m not
kidding - his dog, who you just know has enjoyed every minute of arranging all
the things that got him to this point?

If you’re going to attempt to climb a mountain you should at least make sure
that you enjoy the climb.

I enjoy the practice of writing. Some people do, some people don’t.

It doesn’t bother me whether I’m any good at it and while it’s a pleasant
outcome if others enjoy reading what I wrote, that’s not the point either – I
enjoy the lead-up, all the making notes, capturing ideas, thinking through
some sequence or another, playing with words and rhythms etc, and especially
and particularly where the process takes my own thoughts.

The benefit is precisely in the bureaucracy of it.

Yes I am once again holidaying in Europe, and [once again being Europe-
pilled](/home/2024/04/12/radical) by their long dedication to enriching
everyday life.

UNRELATED SIDE NOTE ABOUT SHOOTING STARS:

A couple evenings ago, on the short walk between a restaurant and the car
park, we looked up at the dark sky and saw a shooting star, actually what
looked like a meteor breaking up – 20 to 30 seconds it took, crossing the sky,
half a dozen or more individual fragments clearly visible to the naked eye,
orange sparks travelling together and parallel streaks trailing behind.

We were spellbound. Open mouthed.

It was visible across Switzerland and Germany.

It was too slow for a meteor really. A rocket test? Probably a Starlink
satellite deorbiting it turns out – similar high-up fireworks were seen in
Brazil a few days ago and in Brisbane too apparently. So maybe that SpaceX
launch a month or two back that didn’t quite lift its Starlinks to a high
enough orbit, maybe that was it, and the satellites are being brought down one
by one.

Does knowing what it was make it any less magical?

Partially it was a relief to be honest. It looked uncanny; my initial unwanted
thought was that the fragment streaks had a nonzero chance of being a volley
of ICMBs. I checked Twitter. The world we’re in.

So, phew, “just” a satellite reorbiting. The first I’ve seen and I’ll see many
more of them in the future I’m sure.

There was intended to be [an artificial meteor shower for the Tokyo
Olympics](/home/2020/12/15/omens) (as previously discussed). There’s a new
startup, [Reflect Orbital](https://www.reflectorbital.com), which can direct
sunlight at your house after dark using its constellation of orbiting mirrors.
I plan to use this to mess with the sleep of my enemies.

Unexpected lights in the night sky used to be seen as an omen and I think
that’s the way I see this one too – the shooting stars over Italy mark a
threshold moment. From today the sky is occupied, a threat, a resource,
entertainment, whatever, but certainly not what it was, when I look up at the
night sky what I see is different now.
