# In which Beat Saber does odd things to my head

I’ve been playing a bunch of [Beat Saber](https://www.beatsaber.com) recently.
It’s a VR rhythm game – you wave your controllers, one in each hand, to hit
blocks as they zoom toward you along a track like you’re tied to a music stave
made out of lasers. You (in virtual reality) have a red light saber in your
left hand, and a blue light saber in your right.

Meanwhile: electronic music.

_(The other game I have been playing a bunch is[Walkabout Mini
Golf](https://www.mightycoconut.com/minigolf) which is (a) super zen in single
player, and (b) in multiplayer, AWESOME for taking meetings. Walk-and-talk is
genuinely the killer app for VR.)_

TWO OBSERVATIONS.

ONE.

Albums should be released with a Beat Saber edition.

Or maybe not quite a dedicated edition? I doubt the market could stand it.
Like: part of me would like to see music released for Beat Saber + Peloton +
Strava, like the way tracks used to get pre-released on national radio to
build hype (does that still happen?). But maybe more realistically, perhaps
Beat Saber should have a built-in podcast app and AI-generated patterns that
are semi-challenging.

The attentional environment of the 20s is wild compared to the 90s. I remember
when multitasking became the norm. Ha. And then _14 years ago_ I wrote:

_2008 is the year we hit Peak Attention._ You can either carry on encountering
as much as you do now, giving every input less and less attention every year,
or you can start managing it, keeping some back to take long-haul attention
flights. What are the consequences of living post-Peak Attention? Nobody will
be able to understand anything hard unless they make sacrifices.

([All the links in that post are
broken.](/home/2008/01/14/the_fancy_legged_man))

So there’s not a chance in heck I can listen to a whole album now, end to end.
I can barely get to 90 seconds checking out a track on YouTube, and that’s
after skipping the first third.

But maybe, if everything _except_ my audio cognition was totally soaked, eyes
body senses all occupied and novelty-baffled and saturated, maybe - just maybe

- I could then focus on new music for a whole 74 minutes?

TWO.

When I play _enough_ Beat Saber I swear I can feel my hemispheres decouple.

One hand is doing one thing, the other another, no cross-talk. After a while I
go fully automatic and I get to take a little step back. Hey left arm, look at
you doing your thing.

Games which allow for the population of selves to appear.

I remember this from my days doing public speaking. At my _best_ (which was
rare) I had three selves – one doing the speaking, another super tuned into
the audience reaction, and a third one step removed.

And for _so long_ these selves could persist, avoiding the wavefunction
collapse back into a single personality.

I feel like in our modern era there is an over-fixation on _engagement_ and
_being in the moment_ – which feel like two aspects of the same elephant to
me, one that app developers pursue as something to be inculcated in audience,
not just response but habit, and the other than we attempt to attain for
ourselves.

BUT MAYBE: what are the good sides to disassociation? When is, I don’t know,
_“simultaneous fugue”_ (to invent a term) an adaptive trait?

Brenda Laurel on “engagement” in 1993. 1993!

In the foregoing discussion, _engagement_ was held up as a desirable–even
essential–human response to computer-mediated activities. Engagement has
cognitive components, but it is primarily understood as an emotion. Why should
we demand that all human-computer activities elicit this particular emotional
response?

Yeah, we shouldn’t.

So maybe in pursuit of engagement, and focus, and flow, we miss other virtues.
For example: the quiet beauty and unusual satisfaction of settling into ennui.
_(It is FULFILLING to spend a night vaguely irritated watching movie trailers
on streaming services, unable to settle on anything, otherwise we wouldn’t
invest so much of our time in it, and if only we could admit that to ourselves
then we could factor out the guilt, experiencing it instead in a pure fashion.
It is the same feeling as the rich have, being perpetually bored and cool, and
the French. This is the closest you or I will get.)_

Let’s stick with simultaneous fugue.

What I’m imagining is a series of games that train me to hold multiple
competing concepts in mind at the same time.

Perhaps, if I can operate my left and right hemispheres simultaneously but
separately for an whole new-albums-worth of time, if only I play enough Beat
Saber, I can hold (for example) the contradictory frameworks of capitalism and
socialism in mind for long enough to imagine a whole new political philosophy,
and thereby save the world.

THESIS + ANTITHESIS = SYNTHESIS.
