# Belief and desire

[On the sociology of Gabriel Tarde:](http://www.shaviro.com/Blog/?p=203)

Tarde denies the existence of higher-level entities (like “society” according
to Durkheim). This is an atomism not just of composition, but of organization.
There is no such thing as social laws and regulations, social norms, social
impositions. There are only power relations among individuals. Certain
individuals impose on others; certain individuals are imitated by others.
Social coherence is merely the result of imitation on a mass scale, together
with raw power impositions.

However, Tarde is not advocating the sort of “individualism” one sees in
traditional liberalism, from Adam Smith to the free-market fanatics of today.
… Individuals, no less than human societies, are composed of multiple elements
that overpower and/or imitate one another. You can’t call Newton the author of
the laws of motion any more than you could call 17th Century British society,
or King Charles as its representative, the author of those laws. The author is
more properly one particular atomistic thought in Newton’s brain, a thought
that overpowered the other thoughts in his brain, compelled them to obey it,
or seduced them to imitate it.

By a similar argument, it cannot possibly be the case that all hydrogen atoms
are uniform and interchangeable. _The only explanation for the apparent
uniformity of nature is that one particular hydrogen atom dominated the
others, forced them to obey it, or induced them to imitate it._

And:

_The ultimate motivating forces that move all of the world, whether human
beings in society, thoughts in a single brain, or hydrogen atoms in a gas, are
according to Tarde belief and desire._ There’s nothing else. Rocks and stars,
indeed atoms themselves, believe and desire just as we do. At the other
extreme, things like ideologies and customs and social classes and
bureaucracies can be explained merely as statistical aggregations of
particular beliefs and desires, amplified by mass imitation.

Belief and desire!
