# Visiting Berlin, and some thoughts on the new IoT program

I’m meeting a ton of interesting startups in the course of outreach for this
[new Internet of Things accelerator in London](http://www.rgaiot.com). What’s
working best is turning up at events and talking about it – because what we’re
doing isn’t typical, I guess, and it needs a bit of an intro. More about that
further down this post…

I’m off to Berlin this week. Spending a few days because the Internet of
Things scene is well developed, and there are a ton of connected hardware
startups.

So, here’s where I’ll be. Please sign up to any and all!

I travelled to the states a couple of weeks back to meet alumni from R/GA’s
previous programs. I wanted to get how it works from the horse’s mouth, if you
know what I mean.

My conclusion is this… it’s an investment package (£75k in the case of the new
London program) plus 12 weeks to take the 10 startups in the cohort through a
traction step-change.

How that works is via carefully selected mentors, and a lightweight curriculum
of workshops (say, on performance marketing, depending on what folks need),
but MAINLY

At the end of 12 weeks, there’s the usual demo event, and that’s usually also
firing a starting pistol for an investment round. There’s a ton of help with
creating the pitch and pitch deck too.

Imagine coming out of the program and having one or two new big names on the
traction slide.

Because R/GA has a stake, interests are aligned on long-term success – I met a
startup in NYC who went through the connected devices program there 2 years
ago. They’re now 30 people, still in the R/GA NYC office, and keen to stay
there because of the access to people and new connections.

So I think of this more like a growth-focused program. I’m moving away from
using the word “accelerator.” The investment terms are friendly to slightly
later stage startups (i.e. the hardware is at least at prototype stage) and
perhaps that’s where the R/GA approach works best.

I say “stage,” that’s not what I mean. Some startups are great at hardware but

- because attention and people budgets are limited - a bit too lean on the
  sales, marketing, and partnerships side. Some are brilliant at the business
  side but need help developing the hardware.

There’s a lot of support in the London ecosystem for early hardware
development (let me know if you need pointers), but in our ground floor space,
we don’t have a machine shop. We’ll be making room for physical work, but
that’s not the focus.

The gap I’m wanting to fill is, ok, you’ve got the hardware, but the service
around it: How to sell that. Or you’re between Kickstarter and shipping, ok
how to get all the ducks in a row so this becomes a serious business.

Growth.

I talk a lot about connected hardware, even when I’m talking about the
Internet of Things. And with IoT, surely I could be talking about platforms
that are software-only? Big data analytics, device provisioning, security,
etc. There’s a lot. And yes, I love that.

But I’m especially interested in hardware. For me, hardware is a signal that
all the power of software and the web is being applied to the real world. The
hardware doesn’t need to be complex or involve a massive breakthrough – in
fact maybe the simpler the better.

Once you apply hardware, you start being able to tackle problems like food
waste, retail, soil, gestural interfaces, and power. In short, where we live.

There’s more info about the program [on the website.](http://www.rgaiot.com)

We’re having an open house event in London the evening of 27 October. [Sign up
here.](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/london-pitch-event-open-house-rga-iot-
venture-studio-uk-tickets-28229794074)

**Applications close 14 November.** The program runs February to May 2017.

Happy to chat on Skype about whether there’s a good fit. [Book some time in my
calendar here.](https://rgaiotventurestudioukoh.youcanbook.me)
