# Post at 17.40, on Monday 4 Feb 2008

Best conference ever! I have been to some excellent conferences: [ETech
2002](/home/more/etcon/roundup.html "My roundup notes. Now painful to read, of
course."), [Design Engaged 2004](http://www.heyotwell.com/engaged2004/ "Conference page."), [eurofoo
2004](http://wiki.oreillynet.com/eurofoo/index.cgi "Conference wiki. Crikey,
that was a long time ago."), [reboot](http://www.reboot.dk/) 2005, 2006 and
2007... maybe one or two more. Here's another for the list: I've just returned
from Vancouver, where I was giving the closing keynote at [Web Directions
North 2008](http://north08.webdirections.org/ "WDN08").

All of those conferences were good in different ways. ETech blew my mind; I
met so many new friends at Design Engaged; reboot specialises in variety and
friendliness; eurofoo, well, many reasons, but the eurodance foam party is a
factor. And of course it's personal preference. Sometimes your brain is ready
to be melted, or by coincidence you're stepping into a new community.

What WDN08 did, for me, was hit the sweet-spot:

I want to thank the [organising
team](http://north08.webdirections.org/about/#conf-organizers "WDN08
organising team."): Maxine Sherrin, Dave Shea, Derek Featherstone and John
Allsopp. Thanks for being so welcoming, and it was so good to meet and hang
out with all of you.

But **mainly it's been the people** \--it's the crowd at a conference that
makes the difference between good and great. (This particular crowd is mostly
new to me too.) I can't count the number of people who showed me intriguing
connections on topics I brought up in my talk, or the number of incredibly
illuminating and hilarious conversations I had. What a joy. And then the easy
conversations with folks I knew and folks I'd just met... I hope I've left
Vancouver having made a few new friends. Thank you all of you who read this (I
lost track of the group on the last night and didn't get to say goodbye to
bunch of people), and please let's stay in touch.

An all round brilliant week.

Slides and transcript of
[Movement](http://north08.webdirections.org/schedule/#webb "Talk abstract.")
will be up in the next couple of days.
