# Fish fingers, boxed software, and processes that create industries

I read the other day that the [invention of modern frozen
food](https://www.loc.gov/everyday-mysteries/technology/item/who-invented-
frozen-food/) is credited to **Clarence Birdseye** in 1924. "Birdseye’s quick-
freezing process actually ended up creating 168 patents! These covered not
only the freezing technique but also the packaging, type of paper used, and
related innovations."

Which is funny because I associated the Birds Eye brand with fish fingers and
potato waffles, but it didn’t occur to me that name was from an actual
historical figure, and that they had made a significant breakthrough.

SEE ALSO:

**Pilkington.** I grew up in the 1980s, at the height of the double glazing
boom, so radio ads were pretty much all for windows and conservatories. (My
first website built for money was in 1996, for a windows and conservatories
firm, but that was the tail end). So the name “Pilkington” is etched in my
memory. Anyway it turns out that, in the 1950s, [Sir Alastair Pilkington co-
invented the continuous float glass
method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Float_glass), which was so successful
that it replaced all other methods.

There’s something about an industrial process named for a person that reminds
me of old school science. It’s _Wheatstone bridge_ this (a type of electrical
circuit) and _Bessemer process_ that (the mass production of steel).

A certain era of sci-fi is littered with fictional artefacts named for
fictional people, and I love it.

e.g. the "Rodebush-Cleveland free drive" in [First
Lensman](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/49525/49525-h/49525-h.htm) (1950)
"Roeser’s Rays" in [Spacehounds of
IPC](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/20857/20857-h/20857-h.htm) (1947) both by
E. E. “Doc” Smith.

But really what I’m into is the idea that a single insight can be continuously
exploited by the company that originated it.

In the modern era, Google _almost_ qualifies, having invented PageRank, the
modern method of ranking websites, but perhaps more important was self-service
AdWords (early 2000s?) which introduced automated auctions, interest
targeting, and engagement feedback loops. So clever, but it means that Google
isn’t as singular as I’d like.

I think maybe Microsoft qualifies? After all: Bill Gates in 1976 wrote the
infamous [Open Letter to
Hobbyists](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Letter_to_Hobbyists) in which he
set out the argument for commercial, consumer software – basically the concept
of software as boxed product. And that idea created an industry.

It’s not frozen fish though, is it.
