# Ancient magicians as innovation consultants. Also birds

I wonder if there’s a mapping from types of magician into types of people who,
today, predict the future. e.g. innovation consultants. Bear with me on this.

There used to be many more birds.

The bird population [is down 29% since 1970 in North
America](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/19/science/bird-populations-america-
canada.html) and likely Europe too.

In the ancient world…

The Mediterranean world of 2,500 years ago would have looked and sounded very
different. Nightingales sang in the suburbs of Athens and Rome; wrynecks,
hoopoes, cuckoos and orioles lived within city limits, along with a teeming
host of warblers, buntings and finches; kites and ravens scavenged the city
streets; owls, swifts and swallows nested on public buildings. In the
countryside beyond, eagles and vultures soared overhead, while people could
observe the migrations of cranes, storks and wildfowl.

And that article is a great read on the prevalence of birds in ancient
literature and thought.

Birds were functional: "In the ancient world, weather and seasonal changes
were matters of vital consequence for agriculture, travel, trade and the
rounds of domestic life, and birds served as a standard point of reference in
calibrating and interpreting the cycles of the year."

Birds were magical: "They crop up in all manner of figures of speech,
proverbs, myths, fables, and in ritual and magical practices, some of which
now seem very strange."

Magic!

I’ve [touched on this before](/home/2015/01/26/filtered) so let me summarise:
the _Codex Justinianus_ (534 AD), being the book of law for ancient Rome at
that time, banned magicians and, in doing so, itemised the types:

I’m not prepared to dismiss magicians as simply [cold
reading](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cold_reading) when they give their
advice. I have to believe they actually have access to something that the rest
of us don’t – knowledge, not the supernatural.

And it’s interesting to imagine what it means for an **augur** to tell the
future.

I mean: birds migrate.

So let’s say a migration from the east is a little early. That means there’s
poor climate to the east, possibly a famine. So the people there will be
struggling. If it’s a province, that means the governor will be struggling and
agitating. If it’s nomads on the Eurasian Steppes, they’ll be starting raids
for food. So send legions to defend the Empire!

Or the birds from the south are looking particularly plump, for several years.
Whoever’s looking after Egypt will be doing pretty well, feeling a bit big for
their boots after that amount of time, perhaps they’ll cause trouble, so hey
Emperor, why don’t you move a few people around to keep them on their toes.

Etc.

I happen to have spent my career in a number of fields that promise to have
some kind of claim to supernatural powers: design, innovation, startups…

It’s not hard to run through a few archetypes of the people in those worlds,
and map them onto types of ancient magician.

Augurs being people who pay attention to the faint signals in the world,
wherever they appear, continuously collating and integrating, waiting until
something mysteriously precipitates out into a hunch, just a hunch, and saying
it out loud, and occasionally - just occasionally - being right… or at least,
provocatively useful.

I would be a middling sort of augur, of course.
