# My best story about Bitcoin and cats, which isn’t even my story

After [mentioning Qarnot the other day](/home/2021/02/16/provenance), which
repurposes waste heat from e.g. computer-heavy 3D graphics rendering to warm
offices, I ran across this article: [How I heat my home by mining crypto
currencies](https://blog.haschek.at/2021/how-i-heat-my-home-by-mining.html),
and it’s beautifully clear:

Never mind how it works on a technical level, the main takeaway is that you
can put some device in your house that uses electricity and produces heat. In
exchange you get shares of that crypto currency coins like Ethereum or Bitcoin
which you can sell on a trading platform.

That device is called is a “miner.” It helps run transactions on the crypto
network, it generates heat, and it makes money. In the old days, they were
sensitive and buggy, so you would have alerts set up to let you know if yours
had crashed (because it would no longer be paying out). They’re more reliable
nowadays.

And, success. The author reports: "I was able to lower my heat pump’s
electricity needs by ~50% and half of the costs are also paid for by the
mining earnings."

All of which is

but putting that aside:

I am reminded

of a story

about Bitcoin

and

my friend’s cat

from 2014:

**BB the cat figured out if he wants to go outside for a walk he just needs to
sit on the bitcoin miner until it overheats and switches off and I come
running down the stairs in a panic.**

And there’s something about triggering a fault in speculative global financial
services infrastructure, as a way of telling a watchdog system to fire an SMS
(or whatever) to interrupt someone’s attention while they’re working so they
come down to investigate and end up opening the door, because you’re too lazy
to _walk upstairs_ and meow which is just, I don’t know. Emblematic. I love
it.

Thank you [Warren Miller](https://twitter.com/warrenlmiller) or rather thank
you his cat, and [here’s where I first tweeted his
story](https://twitter.com/genmon/status/615478723253567489) (I checked I
could share at the time).
