# James Bond and Doctor Who got smaller as they became fantasy

I mentally slice stories into two types – those that can be in our world and
that can’t. Sometimes a story world slides from one to the other and loses its
magic.

Take: James Bond.

(This is old enough that it doesn’t count as spoilers.)

In _Skyfall_ (2012) there is a bombing at the London spy HQ and the top of the
building is blown off. I pass that building on the regular: its in Vauxhall on
the south of the river, near where I live, and the real-life headquarters of
MI6. If an explosion took out half the building, it would be huge news.

The _magic_ of Bond pre-Vauxhall is that it’s a secret layer of reality. Spies
generally and Bond specifically could be anyone you meet. The movie is access
to secret knowledge; it adds a enchantment to everything you see even outside
the theatre – what if _this_ were part of a conspiracy? What if _they_ were
not commuters but part of an elaborate and clandestine operation? There is
magic everywhere.

More: if you see someone wearing the wristwatch that Bond wears, maybe they
are a double-0 agent. If you wear that watch, maybe you are! That’s why the
product placement advertising is so potent: with this type of “new layer to
the universe” narrative (which is particularly powerful with a spy movie where
Bond has had, over the franchise, a variable face) you, the viewer, are
immersed in the world and in the actual lead character.

This all evaporates when the HQ is blown up. I didn’t see the explosion on the
news. Therefore the stories are just… stories.

Something similar happened with _Doctor Who._

Post rebooted _Doctor Who,_ the magic was that it could be happening around
the corner. It involved regular people with regular lives who become enmeshed
suddenly in fantastic - and distant - adventure.

No matter what was happening with you in the day, no matter how dull, there
was always the chance that you would glimpse the Tardis, meet the Doctor, and
be swept off to an alien planet.

Or it could happening on the next street! Hear a weird sound? Aliens. See a
strange cat? Aliens. A person in an unusual hat? The Doctor in a new
incarnation. Maybe, just maybe there could be an extraterrestrial time travel
adventure happening right this second, around the corner. And that lets the
imagination fly.

Secret layers of reality fiction is MSG for the mundane.

But then there was that swarm of daleks that invaded Canary Wharf, and say
what you like about the BBC but that would definitely have hit the news. I
lost interest after that episode. _Doctor Who_ descended to being just another
story. There are no time-travelling benevolent aliens. As a tale it works or
it doesn’t, depending on your taste, but what it can never be, any longer, is
a way of animating everything you see.

There’s just a touch of this with Apple’s adaptation of Asimov’s _Foundation_
novels (which I am enjoying, by the way).

The original stories (from the 1950s and onward) were shaped by John
Campbell’s “competent man” thesis. Campbell was the editor of _Astounding,_
the biggest sci-fi magazine at the time, and Asimov’s mentor. Campbell was
deeply weird-by-which-I-mean-racist (I mean Asimov was deeply weird-by-which-
I-mean-sexist too, the whole crowd) and he had a fierce grip on the magazine
and what was published. His preferences shaped that whole era of sci-fi – and
a lot of what we have now is either an evolution or a counter-response to his
brand (which is why it is so exciting to see new voices in the genre).

The “competent man” is the idea that there is nothing necessarily special or
unique about the protagonist. Instead they are smart, clear-eyed,
scientifically-minded, and, well, _capable._

Also men and also white. And yes, a bit ubermensch-y too.

Put the weirdness aside and there is something magical there for the (white,
male) mid-20th-century reader: you don’t have to be psychic or unique to find
your way through a historically important crisis. But if you are smart and
recognise what’s happening, you can do it. The reader likes to think of
themselves as “competent” in the Campbell sense, so the story places them
centrally in the narrative. The hero.

The early _Foundation_ stories were very much about competent men. A vast
galactic backdrop, sure, but primarily about smart, rational individuals who
in a crisis keep both their head and a sense of humour, and that’s always the
key. It could be you.

Whereas I get the sense that in the _Foundation_ TV show, the protagonists are
special and unique.

But we know, each of us, that we’re not psychic, we don’t have superhuman
powers. So the TV show becomes automatically a story about someone else.
Distancing.

What makes me feel loss is that these are all stories where the fictional
reality enlarged the reader’s or viewer’s reality – their world or their self.
The layers muddled, the realities multiplied. It’s why genre fiction is never
just fantasy. I would call this “unreal but realistic” fiction _fantastical._
It lifts our eyes and weaves story in the air around us.

Then, with these stories, after a transition, the inner fictional reality
shrank and became segmented as something _other._ Not fantastical but fantasy.
It’s still transporting! But our world became smaller as a result.

It’s usually a dramatically powerful transition too: a building blows up; the
daleks invade. But it pays for a moment of drama with undermining what makes
the narrative world special.

I don’t know why I feel so sensitive to layers of reality and the fuzzy
boundary of fiction. And yet.
