# Post at 17.43, on Saturday 7 May 2011

Books read February to April 2011, by date finished:

It's rare to find a second-hand bookshop in London with a good cache of
science fiction nowadays. People buy up the books and sell them online. But I
ran across one, way out of the way, and picked up a half dozen books and
collections of short stories from the 1940s-1970s. The short stories are the
best: _Ascents of Wonders,_ _In the Bone,_ _The Explorers,_ and _The Complete
Venus Equilatoral_ (not on this list as I only finished it today) are all
worth picking up. It's weird reading old stories -- some of the ideas were
copied so many times they've become bored tropes. But others ideas never made
it into the mainstream and are as fresh as the day they were written. And then
of course there's the pleasure of the history diving of it all: the 1940s were
all engineering-led, the 1970s all psychology. From outer space to inner
space.

_Bluebeard_ is probably my favourite Vonnegut. It's a great story, brilliantly
told, and without the familiar Vonnegut tricks of paragraph-by-paragraph cut-
up or surreality. So it gets a little deeper inside me I guess. The
protagonist is [Rabo Karabekian
(SPOILERS),](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rabo_Karabekian "He has a Wikipedia
page, with a reproduction of his art!") one of the founders of the
(fictionalised) American modern art movement Abstract Expressionism.
Karabekian _also_ appears in Vonnegut's earlier novel _Breakfast of
Champions,_ in which he is attacked for the emptiness of his art: "Well, we
don't think much of your painting. I've seen better pictures done by a five-
year old." The painting in question is called _The Temptation of Saint
Anthony,_ and is green with a single, solid, vertical line of yellow tape.

Anyway, at this moment Vonnegut puts into Karabekian's mouth a defence of this
fictional art as fine as I have ever read:

"I now give you my word of honor that the picture your city owns show
everything about life which truly matters, with nothing left out. It is a
picture of the awareness of every animals--the 'I am' to which all messages
are sent. It is all that is alive in any of us--in a mouse, in a deer, in a
cocktail waitress. It is unwavering and pure, no matter what preposterous
adventure may befall us. A sacred picture of Saint Antony alone is one
vertical, unwavering band of light. If a cockroach were near him, or a
cocktail waitress, the picture would show two such bands of light. Our
awareness is all that is alive and maybe sacred in any of us. Everything else
about us is dead machinery."

Amen!

Let me finish on _The Cybernetic Brain,_ which is hands down the most
remarkable book I have read for months and months. On the face of it,
Pickering has written a biography-of-ideas of several key players in
cybernetics (specifically British cybernetics) from the 1950s to the 1970s:
Grey Walter, Ross Ashby, Gregory Bateson, R. D. Laing, Stafford Beer, and
Gordon Pask. And he goes deep. There are sketches of Laing's grand alternative
to psychiatry (fully integrated cooperative community houses); Beer's attempts
to use the rich ecology of woodland ponds as the brains of factories, hooking
sensors up to production lines and pond weed; the influences on Brian Eno and
others; electronic circuits for both Walter and Ashby's proto-robot
experimental probes into learning machines; more.

But what Pickering really does is put forward that these cyberneticians (in
particular, as opposed to American crowd more occupied with control systems)
saw "intelligence" as something not representational (ie, the brain encodes or
contains knowledge) but essentially _performative._ He opens with Walter's
[Tortoise,](http://www.makingthemodernworld.org.uk/icons_of_invention/technology/1939-1968/IC.105/ "Simple robots.") a toy robot that can avoid obstacles, and is attracted by
moderate light (and repelled by bright light). A community of Tortoises would
have unexpected emergent behaviour. Pickering: "The tortoise is our first
instantiation of the performative perspective on the brain ... the view of the
brain as an 'acting machine' rather than a 'thinking machine.'"

Pickering comes to present cybernetics as holding a view of intelligence as
something that only thinks by doing; something that, even when it follows
rules, is not unpredictable so much but can only be calculated or predicted by
actually doing its thing. It's a wonderfully optimistic, re-humanising,
uncontrolled, lively, _meaty_ way of seeing and being, which runs so counter
to the statistical, predictable, crowd behaviour, goal directed,
success/failure and "psychohistorical" perspective we usually take on the
world.

This is also intrinsically a view on _design,_ as Pickering says: "a
distinctly cybernetic notion of design, very different from that more familiar
in modern science and engineering. If our usual notion of design entails the
formulation of a plan which is then imposed upon matter, the cybernetic
approach entailed instead a continuing interaction with materials, human and
nonhuman, to explore what might be achieved--what one might call an
evolutionary approach to design, that necessarily entailed a degree of respect
for the other."

_The Cybernetic Brain_ is academic, large and grainy; it is skittish and the
anecdotes flock and tumble. It's terribly easy to read, like a month of late
night conversations with a brilliant friend. It is not fair of me to say that
it boils down to a single worldview or puts forward just one perspective. But
it _does_ pass on the torch of that perspective. It is not a perspective which
can be learned from reading papers, only kindled by experiencing experiments
vicariously, and above all Pickering's book does just that: it is _inspiring._
Recommended.
