# Post at 10.04, on Saturday 30 Aug 2008

Books read August 2008, with date finished:

I read a lot or a little when I'm feeling glum, and this month I read a whole
bunch plus there was some travelling. (For those of you keeping count, this
means I need to average 7.5 books/mo. for the rest of the year. So if I'm
lagging behind in November, look for me to instigate a personal crisis or two
to get the reading rate up. You have been warned.)

_The Black Swan_ points out that big, rare events dominate continuous trending
(50 years of stockmarket movement is mostly accounted for by 10 days), and
that you should put yourself in positions where black swans - when they do
occur - will be positive. A good framework. Ashby's 1956 _Introduction to
Cybernetics_ is a straight-forward argument from one end of cybernetics to the
other: enough to see why it was believed to hold so much promise. There are
foreshadowings of both the inevitability of order (autocatalytic loops) and
selfish gene ideas in there, which shows how much was nascent in that early
crystal seed.

I've had David Byrne on my to-read list since the book came out, and I can't
believe I waited. Intelligent art and wise words: "the cake results as least
as much from the shape of the pan, the cooking and the timing than from its
ingredients." _Ways of Seeing_ is also enlightening and brilliantly designed.

There's nothing in this month's reading I'd shy away from recommending if it
took your fancy--we'd be able to have a good chat about it whatever you picked
up. Le Guin's short stories are actually better than I remember; both Piercy
and Ferris I couldn't put down; Doc Smith's space opera is pacier even than
his subspace drives; and although _Essays in Love_ seems a little childish
now, and the protagonist is a dick, love _is_ childish, and we _are_ all
dicks. Well, I am.

Okay, but I need to recommend one book and it's between Byrne and Berger. I'm
going to say Berger's _Ways of Seeing_ because it's rescued art for me and
given me a way into a new world.
