# Post at 11.17, on Tuesday 30 Sep 2008

Books read September 2008, with date finished:

This month I've also picked up an original 1955 printing of the Rand
Corporation's [A Million Random Digits with 100,000 Normal
Deviates](http://www.rand.org/pubs/monograph_reports/MR1418/ "No dust jacket,
but used by the person who has dated and named the inside cover, so that's a
good thing.") (which will go with my copy of Ulysses - with the words
rearranged in alphabetical order - from Simon Popper's
[Borromean](http://www.bbc.co.uk/collective/gallery/2/static.shtml?collection=becks2006&image=10 "One of those installations that I breezed by first and then lingered in my
head for a year.")), and a reprint of [507 Mechanical
Movements](http://www.deregulo.com/facetation/2005/12/numbered-books-of-
machines-there-are.html "Mentioned briefly in this post."), but neither of
those I'll read so they won't be included here.

It's been a month of sci-fi and Westerns (I've been watching a bunch of films
too), which has left me dreaming of clear blue skies, long clear vistas,
desert scrub, C beams glittering in the dark near the Tannhauser gate... I'm
not kidding, this is manifesting as a heart-breaking yearning, a pining for
frontiers and wide-open _scale_. I really don't know how to deal with it.

So Zane Grey was magical, and it's incredible to see the Western being written
for the first time--the seed that turns into a genre. Egan's Diaspora was as
poignant as the first time I read it: the hardest of hard sci-fi that delves
into what it means to be human and opens it way, way up. The universe is a lot
bigger after I finish reading that book. Ian Watson I'm pleased to have
discovered as a sci-fi author: his stories have ideas I've read nowhere else,
and I'm happy to find he has a large back catalogue to work through.

Lem was hilarious (oh and, like the best satire, true. Or was it the mascons
telling me the book was good?); Jerome was _also_ hilarious--it had me
laughing out loud, so rare.

Heims' double bibliography of Wiener and Neumann paints the characters and
context of early cybernetics, and in that way sits as a great companion piece
to his later book [Constructing a Social Science for Postwar America: The
Cybernetics Group,
1946-1953](http://web.mit.edu/esd.83/www/notebook/HeimsReview.pdf "PDF
review"). But here's the thing: you also get a picture of Wiener's humanity
(and the surprising humanity in cybernetics), and the horrendous contingency
of the Cold War and the arms race, which appears to have rested heavily on one
of the quickest and most convincing minds of the the 20th century - Neumann -
understanding people like machines, refusing to have faith in humanity, and
being a warmonger. Heims makes a powerful case for a science better embedded
in society, and produces this marvellous quote from Paul Goodman:

"Whether or not it draws on new scientific research, technology is a branch of
moral philosophy, not of science."

Recommended.
