# Post at 11.09, on Tuesday 4 Nov 2008

Books read October 2008, with date finished:

It's to be noted that 63% of the books I read this month have titles that
begin with "The" compared to only 29% for 2008 as a whole (26% if you exclude
October). The run of five is unprecedented, although back [in
March](/home/2008/03/30/books_read_march_2008 "Books read March 2008.") there
were two groups of two separated by an indefinite article.

Høeg: "Seismology is the study of surface tremors caused by the tension built
up below the earth's crust. The study of love represents the seismology of the
individual and of togetherness." This is one point of view: Høeg's characters
are all have deeply different approaches, and I am arrested by how he is able
to see love in such a variety of profound ways:

_Information,_ a collection of essays from 1962, has a delightful turn of
phrase: computers are referred to as "workers" and timesharing a computer
installation is a way to keep them "gainfully employed." It makes me wonder
when the word "working" changed from meaning productively labouring towards a
goal to simply not broken. There's also this quote: "They are called computers
simply because computation is the only significant job that has so far been
given to them." (Ridenour, 1952)

[I've read Tainter's review of collapse
before.](/home/2005/10/26/new_puritans_are_the "Mentioned in a post about New
Puritans.") He comes to a view that complexity has diminishing returns, and a
change in circumstances can mean it makes economic sense for the population to
decomplexify their society. It's a must read. An [op-ed in the New York
Times](http://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/10/opinion/10mulligan.html "'An Economy
You Can Bank On', 9 October 2008.") pointed out that "Although banks perform
an essential economic function — bringing together investors and savers — they
are not the only institutions that can do this." It's true. Just as the
internet reduces our dependence on high street shops and advertising to choose
the products we encounter, and big entertainment verticals to choose what
media we consume to unwind, it also reduces the importance of banks as a
problem solving mechanism for how capital and entrepreneurs meet. But the
financial sector, as an organ of complex society, must be paid for. If its
complexity is no longer required, perhaps we are all better off to see it
simplified.

My recommendation this month is for _On the Road_. To mix pace and narrative
and meaning like that. I was carried away. Poetry!
