# Post at 19.51, on Saturday 1 Jan 2011

I didn't keep a comprehensive list of books I read in 2010 (as I did [in
2007](/home/2007/12/26/i_completed_reading "104 books") and
[2008](/home/2008/12/31/i_completed_reading "Another 104. Crikey.")), and I
didn't make much time for reading. But here are the ones I can remember, in
roughly chronological order.

There's a bunch of Hemingway in there. At the beginning of 2009, I read a
couple of books about how to write: _On Writing_ (Stephen King), and _Steering
the Craft_ (Ursula K. Le Guin). Le Guin includes passages that she encourages
you to read out loud, so I'd take a hot bath and listen to myself speaking.
Reading out loud is surprisingly tough. One or two of the passages were
Hemmingway, and the beauty and many overlapping rhythms of his straightforward
prose amazed me. So I read _Fiesta_ (aka _The Sun Also Rises_) which blew me
away, and then _The Old Man and the Sea_ , which didn't so much. Then I
rationed out several of his other novels and stories over 2010.

_Men Without Women_ is rare: stories about men as _men,_ not exploring the
human condition, but the _male_ condition: pride, legacy, obligation,
competition, camaraderie, the inability to connect. Deep masculine
preoccupations.

Anyway, _Across the River and into the Trees_ and _For Whom the Bell Tolls_
are two of the best books I've read, ever ever ever. So very real, deeply
touching, frank. I don't know how to say this, but I don't want to read each
word but _eat_ it, savour it and consume it and never let it out. _Across the
River_ is heartstoppingly, achingly beautiful and mournful, every letter and
every dot of it, and I swear on my life that I truly have to stop breathing
after every chapter for a week until I'm able to digest it and hold it inside
me.

I read a bunch of business books too. Business occupies a lot of mind right
now because I'd like for [the studio](http://berglondon.com/ "Work!") to
achieve our lofty ambitions profitably and happily. So I think about how to do
that, and read about it too, and it's good to see how other people approach
marketing, or appraisals, or pitch presentations. I'd recommend pretty much
all of the ones in the list (and one from 2009 too: _The Pixar Touch: the
Making of a Company_ , David Price). _Getting to Yes_ is the best. I'm
terrible at negotiation, even the first few pages of the book made me feel
sick through nervous tension by association. But the book takes the sting out
of it with a common-sense approach, so that's cool.

There's a lot of sci-fi. I use it to wind down, and to think. _Anathem_ is a
delight, so convincing, the weaving into reality of a whole world and a whole
new physics (just as _Illuminatus_ is I suppose). And you should check out
_Golem XIV_ , the novella at the end of Lem's _Imaginary Magnitude_. It's
about two massive artificial intelligences, straddling the
[singularity,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technological_singularity "The law
of accelerating returns.") and how their concerns are not human concerns. Lem,
as he showed in his collection _The Cyberiad_ , is the Jean-Baptiste Lamarck
of revealing and taxonomising and understanding this brand new kingdom of
life, the non-human artificial intelligences.

Fnord.

The highlight of 2010 was _Experiences in Groups_ (W. R. Bion). I made a piece
of software called **Glancing** back in 2003 (read the [conference
presentation](http://glancing.interconnected.org/2004/02/etcon/ "Glancing at
the O'Reilly Emerging Tech conference, 2004.") and [more
notes](/notes/2003/09/glancing/ "A hypertext! Remember those?")). It was
simple desktop software with a glanceable interface, allowing non-verbal
communication for small groups of close friends. Since then I've been
convinced that a better understanding of small groups is key to good design of
technology and services ([for
instance,](http://berglondon.com/talks/movement/?slide=38 "A 2008 mention of
small groups in a presentation.") [and
again](/home/2007/12/28/wrapping_up_2007#twentythree "I should do this kind of
essay again.")), but research is hard to come by. [Group
Dynamics](https://facultystaff.richmond.edu/~dforsyth/gd/ "Online resources to
go alongside the book.") (Donselson Forsyth) is decent, but a little
structural for my taste. Bion, on the other hand, is hot, spilly and wet.

Bion's approach to groups is psychiatric in origin, and he develops a theory
of the various modes of behaviour groups adopt, and how they interplay.
Personally I cross-breed Bion with what little I've picked up from Latour -
that you should [ascribe agency to non-human actors too](http://www.learning-
theories.com/actor-network-theory-ant.html "Latour's Actor-Network Theory.")
\- and so I regard products as part of a social group just as much as people,
and that throws up interesting questions: when we design products, what modes
are they introducing into the group mentality? Will they tip the balance
towards a dependency mode, rather than promoting sophisticated creativity?

Like all good books, I've found Bion useful in my work, and insightful in my
personal and professional lives. I won't say any more right now because I'm
sure I'll come back to it.

Also you should read _the Red Men_ , because it's about [mirror
worlds](http://magicalnihilism.com/2005/05/03/practical-mirrorworlds/ "Matt
Jones on David Gelertner, back in 2005.")
([whoa](http://techcrunch.com/2010/12/08/googles-next-big-thing/ "'We're
trying to build a virtual mirror of the world at all times,' Mayer [Google]
said.'")) and artificial intelligence and robots, and that's what 2011 is
going to be all about.
