# All kinds of online marketplaces are creaking under scams

I put out a shout for a graphic designer on Twitter a couple of days ago. I
was bombarded by direct messages from accounts that _presented_ as people, and
talked like people, and tweeted like people… but their portfolios were stuffed
with generic logos clearly pumped out by software. Opportunist individuals,
side-hustling their way to projects they then outsource? Or paint-by-numbers
design farms that use fake “young designer” bots as a sales channel?

Then there are the Instagram ads for well-photographed products with well-put-
together brands – that I then find on Alibaba being sold directly out of
multiple factories. Ditto when you search on Amazon for digital scales for
baking, or wristbands for running with key pockets, or STEM toys (to pick
three recent examples) and the results are swamped with semi-identical
products from a dozen different brands.

Except for the disingenuous authenticity, it’s unfair to call these scams. The
system is functioning as intended. The system was design as a marketplace, and
indeed buyers are being connected to sellers… only there are invisible
intermediaries who are excellent at targeting the channel but contribute zero
added value.

Though there are also actual scams to be found elsewhere:

IN THE MIDST OF THIS there are legit new companies starting, and legit new
people to work with. But it’s getting _increasingly_ hard to find them (and
once found, trust them) through the noise of the scams.

What spam is to communication, scams are to marketplaces.

Only there’s no way I can install an anti-scam filter.

My hunch is that after 20+ years of scaling marketplaces of all kinds,
reducing friction and increasing activity, we’re hitting a wall similar to the
malware wall hit by Windows (and ultimately “solved” by the shift to managed
computing led by iOS), the spam wall hit by email (Gmail’s spam filter was a
band-aid; ultimately comms moved off email into WhatsApp and corporate
messaging), and the disinfo wall hit by large social network (not yet solved,
but we can see attempted solutions in form of private Discords and the rise of
the other cosy online spaces). Like these, the fix isn’t just more of the
same.

So assume this problem is getting worse. What is to be done?

Two solutions from history no longer work in 2021:

I can speculate…

What if every brand had some kind of digital certificate, and anybody in my
trusted networks could anonymously certify that they had had a good
experience? (By networks I mean: mutuals on Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram;
people I correspond with on email; and so on.) My initial model is HTTPS,
which guarantees that your web browser has a connection with a certified
endpoint, and no intermediaries have futzed with the data.

And then the certificate would be displayed as a badge wherever I see that
brand in a channel, whether as a Facebook ad, in a list of Amazon results, via
search, or on their own website.

Maybe instead of social signals, I could subscribe to a service that
whitelists and blacklists brands, and use that as my source of trust instead.
Perhaps credit card companies could also feed into it: when a purchase is
made, the digital certificate transfered with the payment authorisation, and
attached to any future chargeback or refund.

This would be something presented as an overlay on existing large web
properties, so it probably has to be independent from them and built into the
browser somehow. Instead of being yet another startup, could it be a
_protocol_ someone, something that everyone could adopt, large and small?

The key point is to decouple trust from the retailer itself (as marketplaces
such as Amazon are unable to provide this), and to make the badge visible on
every single discovery surface.

I’ll leave it as an exercise for the reader to extend this to freelancers and
LinkedIn. To my kind it’s a similar-shaped problem. Neither is about identity
(you are who you say you are) but about misrepresentation (your implied
characteristics are the same as your actual characteristics).

We need big, distributed, imaginative solutions.

SEMI-RELATED:

Here is a story about the first thing I ever bought online.

Back in the late 90s there was this new thing called _e-commerce._ i.e. buying
stuff on the web.

So in 1997 or maybe early 1998 I decided to buy something online for the first
time. I mean, typing my credit number in an online form and everything, not
just selecting from an online catalogue.

But I decided that, because e-commerce would plainly dominate in the future, I
would purchase something that was in some way emblematic of the whole
absurdity of e-commerce, to mark the occassion.

[Here’s a photo of what I bought.](https://www.instagram.com/p/CPOnvGepMNQ/) I
still have it. (Or rather: it lives in my mum’s garden.) It’s a garden
ornament.

So it tickled me to get this nasty simulacrum as a kind of conscious
foreshadowing of the rest of my online life.

But knowing what I know now, I should be thankful that I didn’t receive just a
photocopy of a picture of the thing in an envelope, or that it actually turned
up at all.
