# Bronze- versus iron-based economics changed the kind of societies that could exist

In the long run, is economics the mould that shapes society?

I’ve been learning about the [Late Bronze Age
collapse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Late_Bronze_Age_collapse) recently
_(that’s the Wikipedia page)._

A period of a few decades "between c. 1200 and 1150 BCE saw the cultural
collapse of the Mycenaean kingdoms, of the Kassites in Babylonia, of the
Hittite Empire in Anatolia and the Levant, and the New Kingdom of Egypt; the
destruction of Ugarit and the Amorite states in the Levant, the fragmentation
of the Luwian states of western Anatolia, and a period of chaos in Canaan."

These civilisations all interacted with one another, and had a carefully
negotiated co-existence – "the first international diplomatic system known to
us" – discovered via a cache of clay tablets found in Egypt called the [Amarna
letters](https://www.worldhistory.org/Amarna_Letters/).

After collapse: trade and diplomacy shrunk; literacy and quality of life
decreased.

What caused it? Candidate explanations include:

But those named ones feel like _stressors_ not causes. And others candidates
(political collapse; class struggle) sound again not like causes but
consequences.

So my favourite candidate is the shift from bronze to iron.

Here’s an episode of _In Our Time_ on [The Bronze Age
Collapse](https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07fl5bh) (June 2016). I learnt a
bunch.

For example, about bronze itself:

Iron was emerging around the time of the Late Bronze Age collapse, although it
wasn’t common until the 7th century BC (400 years later).

But iron undermines bronze-based power structures. Again from that episode:

One could argue that iron, which of course unlike copper and tin is almost
everywhere, so is readily accessible - so you don’t need to build long-
distance trade routes to find it and so on - you can take a broad view that
that _it undermines the ability to monopolise long-distance trade._ Therefore
smaller entities can get involved.

When states arose to replace those the collapse, they looked different: "new
people organised politically in a different way." The new states were smaller
and more numerous than the older, grander palace kingdoms.

Here’s the story I tell myself about bronze:

It sounds to me like bronze is intrinsically connected to the foundations of
how power is established and maintained.

Over time, bronze _requires and allows for_ great concentrations of wealth,
and that’s why we see this small number of incredibly wealthy, grand palace
kingdoms. Their prestige, after centuries, relies on highly efficient
extraction of wealth from their networks.

But then comes iron. Iron is an evenly distributed technology (as a material,
and knowledge of how to work with it). It can’t be monopolised.

Even in iron’s infancy, it allows for a kind of peer-to-peer trade and wealth
to arise.

And that destabilises the status quo. Which is turns out has become brittle.

I think of stressor events on a system a bit like shaking up a box full of
oddly-shaped rocks. During the shaking, the box “settles” towards its low
energy state; the rocks end up more closely packed. In previous centuries,
stressor events have shaken up these civilisations, and they’ve “settled” into
palace kingdoms.

But now the status quo, the low energy state, has altered. Iron is present. So
the stressor events (climate change, invasions) “settle” the system towards a
_new_ status quo, one which doesn’t involve the palace kingdoms.

And so they collapse.

We’ve seen this story before!

Around 13,000 BCE, Europe warmed out of its Ice Age, and mobile hunter-
gatherers settled into villages. Long-distance trade routes emerged around
seashell trade, used to display wealth – wealth disparity and elites emerged
around that trade.

But a thousand years later, the Ice Age re-emerged (temporarily). The villages
vanished… and the elites too:

Wealth and power had evidently been dependent on sedentary village life. This
provided the elite with the opportunity to control the trade that brought
seashells and other items to the villages. A return to mobile lifestyles swept
away the power base and society became egalitarian once again.

I wrote this up last year: [Some rambling thoughts about the stuttering end of
the last ice age and what lockdown
means](/home/2020/04/20/continuous_partial_lockdown) _(April 2020)._

So these are two stories of economics providing the attractor to which the
chaotic system of society gradually drifts.

The picture in my head is that certain kinds of material scarcity allow for
the monopolisation of exchange, and that allows for the hoarding of wealth and
the creation of elites, where the elite system becomes self-reinforcing… and
increasingly efficiently but ultimately brittle – until the material scarcity
itself changes. Then we see collapse.

HUGE CAVEAT: this is all a wild guess based on not-even-adequate reading about
stuff that happened and a strong dose of systems thinking. I find all this
fascinating.

If I could go back and do it all again, I would probably study history.

And if bronze is technology which can be monopolised, and iron is technology
which is evenly distributed, does the story of the Late Bronze Age Collapse
hold lessons for centralised versus decentralised technologies in modern
times?

Directly: I’m thinking of finance, and data.

Indirectly: I’m thinking of social communication. Do bottlenecks in the “trade
routes” of communication (that is, social media) necessarily lead to wealth
disparities in the equivalent currency – which in this case would be social
capital? That is, the more efficient our global broadcast systems, the more
extreme celebrities we create?
