# Ceci n’est pas une calculatrice

The main calculator I have on my phone is [PCalc](https://pcalc.com). It is
worth every penny.

PCalc has also been going a super long time. The first version came out in
_1992._

[Here’s the announcement of PCalc’s
release](https://tla.systems/blog/2017/12/23/a-long-time-ago-in-a-glasgow-far-
far-away/), reproduced on the developer’s blog:

Subject: [*] PCalc 1.0 Submission

Enclosed is a binhex file containing a submission for your archives. **PCalc
is a neat simulation of a programmable scientific calculator.**

I can’t get this out of my head. Is it a calculator? Or is it a _simulation_
of a calculator?

Something similar comes up when I’m reading to my toddler. We’ll be pointing
things out in a book, she’ll be like “lion,” “table,” and I’m thinking sure, a
picture of a lion, a picture of a table, we’re all good. And then there’s a
picture of a picture, framed on a wall in the book, and she says “picture” and
I’m like: Um, the whole page is also a picture, I lack the necessary
information to disambiguate where you’re pointing here. Your finger is
pointing with _x_ and _y_ coordinates, but additionally we need an _r_
coordinate to indicate the level of reality being pointed at; are you pointing
at the picture in the inner reality of the page, or the picture in the outer
reality which _is_ the page? Both are pictures, but we need to be precise
here.

We need to distinguish because the consequences are profound. Here’s why:

A simulation inside reality cannot leak out. Characters don’t come out of the
books I read (I assume).

But a simulation nestedinside a simulation is still a simulation. When I play
cards inside _Red Dead Redemption,_ I’m not playing a _simulation_ of cards.
I’m just playing cards.

To go back to my toddler’s book: framed art on the wall of my room stays
within the frame. But framed art in a picture book can do anything the book’s
author desires, including mixing with anything in the [inner
reality](/home/2017/09/01/bladerunner) of the book.

So what if _our_ universe is a simulation? Then any and all simulations in our
world - books, movies, computer graphics in GPUs - are all at the same “level”
of reality as us. They can, potentially, leak.

Which I feel should be measurable and detectable in some way? If we live in a
simulation, then a dense store of other simulations, fictional narratives
even, say for example a library or a Netflix datacentre, should have a
distorting effect on local physics. Which would be noticeable, in theory, by
building an extremely large and sensitive particle collider and looking for
deviations.

Anyway.
