# Post at 15.18, on Wednesday 18 Feb 2009

[Carl Steadman](http://www.suck.com/fish/contributors/steadman/ "I spent a
happy morning browsing suck.com the other day.") opened my eyes to the
possibility of narrative in new media with two pieces: _Two Solitudes_ (1995),
in which you would eavesdrop by email on a conversation between two lovers?,
friends? becoming distant, over 30 days, and _99 Secrets_ which I first
encountered in 2000.

You can [read Two
Solitudes](http://www.intertext.com/magazine/v5n1/solitudes.html "In
InterText.") online, though without the slow delivery and intimacy of the
inbox, it loses much of its poignancy and involvement.

_99 Secrets_ has similarly decayed. **99secrets.com** , where you could click
through 99 short snippets of conversation between an anonymous _he_ and _she_
, has been snagged by a domain squatter and is consequently [no longer
available in the Wayback
Machine.](http://web.archive.org/web/*/http://99secrets.com "We're sorry,
access to http://99secrets.com/ has been blocked by the site owner via
robots.txt.") (I've attempted to buy the domain to enable access to the cache
again, but haven't had a response to my emails.) It's sad.

Recently I found [miss bunnyhead darling](http://galadarling.livejournal.com/ "Just by Googling.") kept the 99 secrets and posted them back in 2006. I am
super, super grateful. As ephemeral as the secrets maybe should be, I think
they still deserve an audience.

What I've done is taken that list - which I'm not going to link to directly
here - and I'm posting Carl Steadman's 99 Secrets to Twitter instead,
randomly, roughly once a day: follow [@to_no_one](http://twitter.com/to_no_one "Carl Steadman's 99 Secrets.").

Thank you miss bunnyhead darling, for your act of care! Thank you Carl, for
showing us what could be done and how we can be touched! I hope I don't offend
anyone by re-performing the words.

The name I've used on Twitter is from the final secret:

_99\. i still love you, he said, to no one._
