# Charlie Bit My Finger should be acquired for the nation

The status of _Charlie Bit My Finger_ is uncertain. It should be acquired as
art by the nation.

The backstory:

Almost exactly two years ago, [I wrote about this whole
story](/home/2021/05/27/charlie).

HOWEVER,

if you go to `/watch?v=_OBlgSz8sSM` on YouTube
([here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_OBlgSz8sSM)) you’ll get this message:
"This video is private"

What gives?

_Charlie_ was set as Unlisted: a public video to anyone with the link, but it
doesn’t appear in on-site searches or recommendations (it’s for personal
sharing).

In July 2021 there was a policy change to keep owners of such videos safe:
[all older Unlisted videos were set to
Private](https://routenote.com/blog/unlisted-videos-to-private/) – unless the
owner decided to opt out of the change.

The new owners of _Charlie_ did nothing… and so the video has gone.

This is sad.

Part of me thought that the NFT thing was just part of the overall NFT craze,
and we would all quietly step away from it and it would turn out that the
original creators of _Charlie_ still owned the actual video, etc.

But maybe that auction had a whole legit contract behind it?

You can see [the Charlie NFT on
OpenSea](https://opensea.io/assets/ethereum/0x9b5d407f144da142a0a5e3ad9c53ee936fbbb3dd/1)
and, from there, the profile of the new owners, 3FMusic. [They seem active
still](https://opensea.io/3FMusic/collected)… though they’re not the meme-
history collectors I assumed they would be. But they own a bunch of different
NFTs.

I guess they’re just sitting on this particular asset. Or maybe they’re
forgotten they have it.

In 100 years there will be a viral podcast or whatever about tracking down
this once-famous, now-lost art, and how it ended up in the hands of a Dubai
crypto speculator and then left on an abandoned and rotting blockchain. It’s
weird seeing this “losing” step play out in real-time.

So clearly this video belongs in a museum.

(A British museum, probably, given it’s of British origin, although the “site”
is American, so there’s a Parthenon Marbles-style dispute for the distant
future.)

_Charlie_ is important because it’s one of the first massively popular bits of
content of the global scale internet. It’s representative of society in a way
that earlier content isn’t. And important! In lieu of knowing what is
historically _“significant,”_ mass popularism will do.

Plus it’s a meme. It’s _of_ the internet. Music videos would go big in any
medium. But for a home video to achieve this? “User-generated content” (as we
used to call it) as big as the professionally produced stuff? It says a lot
about what the internet was to become.

Whether it belongs in an art museum or a cultural one I don’t know, but two
things need to happen:

(In the future, monument URLs should be treated differently. The big sites
should retire them from regular service, intercept the request away from
whatever app they are currently running, and redirect the URL to a server farm
running in the Svalbard Global Meme Vault or whatever.)

To begin with I felt like _Charlie,_ the NFT, should be bought directly by the
nation from 3FMusic. I know the UK government has a process for this.

BUT: direct acquisition isn’t traditionally how art has ended up in the big
museums.

We need collectors! Philanthropic donators! Tax dodges! The whole kit and
caboodle of the art and cultural artefacts ecosystem.

So _really_ what we need is a billionaire who wants to put some real effort
into figuring out what it means to collect memes.

How do you collect _Charlie Bit My Finger,_ really? How do you display it? How
do you attach your name to it?

How do you do that for another dozen memes of similar value? Not memes that
you personally feel are funny, or that are “meaningful” somehow. Let’s be
blunt here: the arbiter of value is views.

Then how do you lend a collection to a museum? And eventually donate it?

Museums used to promise to build a new wing to display the famed collection of
a benefactor. What’s the novel architecture such that the public can visit and
enjoy memes? How do school kids sit down to sketch them and learn the
significance?

How are memes valued so that our philanthropic billionaire can get the tax
writeoff in addition to their legacy?

There’s a huge pathfinding exercise here. But this kind of process has to
start _somehow._

I know someone who works in acquiring art on behalf of the country. I’ll have
to ask her.

And if you’re a wannabe meme-collecting philanthropist, perhaps I should put
the two of you in touch.
