# What if charisma is a golden mane?

I was talking with my old friend [Adam
Greenfield](https://speedbird.wordpress.com/about/) a few months back and the
topic touched on the rich and the powerful and the uncanny gravity they have.

I raised my pet theory that maybe charisma is a real physical attribute like
height or eye colour, not psychology, and the hyper charismatic have
effectively a mutation – or putting it another way, an evolutionary adaptive
trait.

There are some involuntary tells that are on the face of it invisible, but
perhaps pre-consciously detectable:

[Paul Ekman’s theory of micro-
expressions](https://www.paulekman.com/resources/micro-expressions/) holds
that our emotions are visible in sub-second facial expressions, invisible to
the eye without training, but visible to cameras.

Then check out this [video magnification
technique](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e9ASH8IBJ2U) which shows that the
pulse is visible through colour changes in the face. I’m sure this must be
unconsciously visible – perhaps sensed just as a feeling or an intuition.

But we do have an impressive ability to detect when a person is lying! Humans,
generally, are pretty good judges of character.

I’ve been in rooms with reasonably powerful people once or twice. David
Cameron and Steve Ballmer come to mind. (Adam had a few too, but those are his
stories to tell.) I was not a fan of either of them. Afterwards – I felt
impressed? Respect? Reviewing my experience, there’s nothing tangible that
should have changed my view. No conversation, just presence. AND YET.

So that’s unnerving.

It might not be purely visual. Maybe it’s a mutation which leads to
intoxicating pheromones. But I think it’s physical, or at least that it’s
multifactor and a large factor is physical, because it doesn’t work as well
through TV.

What if this ability is the ability to hack human social interaction. They
don’t know how they’re doing it, or even that they are.

There’s a 1953 short story by Philip K Dick called [The Golden
Man](https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_Golden_Man) (you can read the whole
thing at that link).

Nuclear fallout has given rise to mutants – humans with bat wings, or
psychokinesis. A government department methodically finds and euthanises them:
the fear is that a mutant will be appear that can out-compete baseline humans.

The Golden Man is such a mutant. He is quick; he can see five seconds into the
future; he has a golden mane. He is unnaturally sexually attractive. But he
has no frontal lobe: he is pure animal. His irresistibility means he will win
in the only race that matters: "We’re the last of our line – like the
dinosaur."

People with charisma. People with charm. So what would that mean, if true?
