# My recipe for chicken pilau

_The following was originally posted on Medium and has since been moved here._

Green chillies (4), cinnamon bark, black peppercorns, cloves, green cardamon
pods, cumin seeds, garlic paste, ginger paste, turmeric, chilli powder,
mustard seeds, fresh coriander.

Wash 3 cups of rice and leave to soak.

In a half cup of water, put

This is the whole garam masala. Leave it to soak.

A pilau is a spiced rice-based dish where the rice is cooked in the stock and
the flavours of the other ingredients, as opposed to a biryani where the rice
is pre-cooked. This pilau is made with chicken, rice and potatoes.

This recipe is a combination of two recipes from _A taste of our cooking_ by
the Ismaili Women’s Organisation. I’ve added notes of my own, primarily
details about cooking spiced food that would be taken for granted by almost
everyone reading the book, but that I’ve picked up along the way.

It’s not a particularly complicated recipe. It’s the one I use.

For me, when I think of pilaus I think of family gatherings where dozens of
people are eating and there are chapattis and vegetable curries and all kinds
of things. I think of one of my aunts cooking.

A pilau is an easy comfort food. This quantity will last a week, tasting
better every day.

In a saucepan:

Get the yoghurt mixture good and hot, then add 3 large chicken breasts (about
500g or 1 lb) chopped into about 10 pieces.

Cook, boiling, until tender (that is, until the chicken is pretty much done).

Leave in the saucepan, and put to the side.

Peel 6 medium potatoes, cut them into 1 inch cubes. Parboil. Drain and put to
the side.

A few years ago I was on the tube to work and I had one of those scent
memories that is so strong it’s an interruption. The olfactory bulb, the part
of the nose that does the smelling, isn’t separate from the brain like the
eyes or the ears: It’s part of the brain itself, wired deep into the ancient
vaults that deal with emotion and memory.

And so it was, I was right back in my grandparents’ house in Nairobi, where
we’d visit when I was a kid, and there were all the smells and memories, all
the family and old stories, all the people, some now gone, and me still on the
tube.

I looked around for whoever it was who smelt like that, whatever had triggered
the memory, thinking someone nearby smelt like that back room in Nairobi, then
realised — I had cooked the chicken pilau on my own, as an adult, for the
first time the evening before — the ginger, garlic, and spices were coming out
of my skin, and it was me.

A happy connection to my roots.

By this point in the recipe, my house already smells pretty good. It keeps
getting better.

Make the following in the pot you’ll be leaving the pilau in for the rest of
the week, so all the flavour stays. This should be the largest pot you own.

Toast the following until it all smells great but nowhere near burnt. Toasting
means cooking on the dry pan bottom, moving the spices around a little.

Add 2–4 tbsp vegetable oil, make a paste and get it good and hot.

Fry onions until light brown… they should be only just done.

Add the whole garam masala and boil away the water.

Spoon the chicken and chillies out of the yoghurt. Fry until the chicken  
is fully coated and done. It should be moist, and coloured but not going
brown. Make sure the ingredients are fully mixed and not stuck to the bottom
of the pan.

_(Drain the rice.)_

_(Prepare 5 cups of vegetable stock (6 heaped tsp of powder) in boiling water,  
and throw in a cup or two frozen peas. Give a minute for the peas to  
cook.)_

_(Preheat the oven to 160C/320F.)_

To the pot: Add the remaining yoghurt from the chicken saucepan, 2 more green
chillies (prepared as before), and 2 tomatoes chopped into eighths. Mix and
cook briefly.

Add the potatoes and vegetable stock. Stir thoroughly.

Bring to the boil, salt to taste.

Add the drained rice, stir _once_ , bring back to the boil, then cover and
simmer for 15–20 minutes or until the rice is cooked.

Uncover, and steam dry by placing in the oven for 30 minutes.

The pilau will be rich with some chilli heat, not too hot. When I eat it, the
spices fill me, my skin tingles, I’m full of memories; Suddenly I’m three
dimensional and completely solid, the internal ballast of history and family.

Eat with yoghurt and fresh coriander.

I usually make this chicken pilau with fresh curry leaves. I love the taste of
curry leaves so I use them liberally: A couple crumpled then dropped in whole
whenever chillies are added, and a couple more chopped and cooked up when the
spices are toasted.
