# Some thoughts on the Chorleywood bread process

A few months back, I learned about the Chorleywood bread process, invented 1961. 98% of shop-bought bread in the UK is now made this way _(caveat: source
is from 2009)._ It uses additives to bake quicker.

Before, if you’d said to me something like _“they’re putting stuff in the food
that’s making everyone gluten intolerant”_ I think I would have filed that as
a food conspiracy theory. Now? I think I’d lean in that direction.

Here’s what I read.

Some would say that 1961 was a bad year for bread. It was the year that
Chorleywood Bread Process came into being. Developed by the Flour Milling and
Baking Research Association in Chorleywood, the process revolutionised the
baking industry. This high-speed mechanical mixing process allowed the
fermentation time to be drastically reduced, and meant that the lower-protein
British wheats could be used in place of the more expensive North American
imports. Various chemical improvers and antifungal agents are necessary
ingredients, as are certain hydrogenated or fractionated hard fats. This is
high-output, low-labour production, designed to maximise efficiency and profit
at the expense of the consumer.

Mass-produced bread is almost undoubtedly worse for you. Apart from the
dubious additives and fats it contains, the short fermentation makes the wheat
harder to digest. Indeed, some believe the Chorleywood processing method is to
blame for a sharp increase in gluten intolerance and allergy. It is also
probable that the prolific crossbreeding and modification of modern-day wheat,
to produce strong, tougher, harder-to-digest gluten, has contributed to wheat
intolerance.

Somewhere in the region of 98 per cent of bread in this country [the UK] is
mass-produced, and most of it comes from around a dozen huge plant bakeries.

Incidentally, Stevens’
[Bread](https://uk.bookshop.org/books/bread-9780747595335/9780747595335) is a
great recipe book. Good British recipes, restaurant standard, well laid out,
straightforward. Love it. Stevens clearly has a bee in his bonnet re handmade
vs industrial bread, and that’s exactly who I would want to be writing such a
book.

Reading more: [here’s a neutral
view](https://bakerpedia.com/processes/chorleywood-baking-process/); [here’s a
sceptical view](https://www.anhinternational.org/2014/04/23/the-chorleywood-
process-and-the-rise-of-real-bread/).

And to summarise what I learnt about Chorleywood:

I’ve no idea whether it matters that the yeast isn’t given much time to
ferment the flour. Is it possible that there is a different, harder-to-digest
kind of gluten that is formed when the additives drive the process so much
faster? Are there implications of having extra yeast hanging around? Does all
of this have a long-term negative effect on human health?

Especially because 1961 is relatively recent. I was born in 78; it would have
take a while for Chorleywood to ramp up. So my generation - plus a little
older - is really the first generation to have grown up eating bread like
this. Is that why so many people now get bloated from wheat and ill from
gluten… or is it merely that we’re more aware of the effects now?

Honestly, I have zero idea whether any of this truly matters.

It makes my systems-thinking spidey-sense tingle though.

So I bake my own bread now and I’m cautious about what I buy.

Nat Torkington shared a paper with me after we chatted about this. [Effect of
breadmaking process on in vitro gut microbiota parameters in irritable bowel
syndrome](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25356771/): "In conclusion, breads
fermented by the traditional long fermentation and sourdough are less likely
to lead to IBS [Irritable Bowel Syndrome] symptoms compared to bread made
using the Chorleywood Breadmaking Process."

So… So.

I didn’t know about Chorleywood before, but now I do. And although I’m not
_convinced_ that industrial bread is bad for me, I am open to the idea enough,
and the consequences are bad enough, that I have changed my diet.

The _wider_ implication, for me, is this:

If bread, then what else?

Back to bread.

Last week, I tried adding diastatic malt powder to my sourdough. I mainly use
recipes from the _excellent_ [Handmade
Loaf](https://uk.bookshop.org/books/the-handmade-loaf-the-book-that-started-a-
baking-revolution/9781784723347) by [Dan Lepard](https://www.danlepard.com)
and he recommends adding a spoon of (handmade) powdered barley malt at the
start.

I didn’t make the malt myself. I bought it.

It turns out that adding malt is like a cheat code for baking bread.

My loaf proved a little faster, the crumb was more open, and the loaf had a
lovely chew. All good. My starter has been sluggish in the cold weather, and
this malt has been the antidote. Excellent.

It turns out that malt works in a pretty interesting way.

Malt contains amylase, which is an enzyme. I remember it from biology at
school – if you hold a piece of bread in your mouth, it begins to taste sweet,
and the amylase in your saliva is the reason why.

Amylase cuts up non-sweet starches into simple, sweet sugars which are more
easily digested by the yeasts.

_Point, the first._ I find it wonderful and amazing that a traditional baking
ingredient turns out to be biochemically active and there’s a metabolic reason
why it’s there. I wonder when amylase was discovered and this connection made.

_Point, the second._ Amylase is one of the enzymes in the Chorleywood bread
process.

So am I now on the path to industrial bread?

How do I draw the line?

And at what point should I stop?

This, it occurs to me, is the whole question of technology in a nutshell. Or
in a banneton, as the case may be.
