# Three requests for the Google Chrome team as they experiment with RSS

I’m pleased to see [Chrome experimenting with RSS
feeds](https://blog.chromium.org/2021/05/an-experiment-in-helping-users-and-
web.html) – and therefore possibly Google getting interested in increased RSS
feed support. RSS is important! The interface is this:

_(**Don’t know what RSS is?** RSS feeds are how you can get the latest content
out of websites and into dedicated “newsreader” apps which are made for
reading, with an interface a little like Facebook but totally decentralised
and un-surveilled. The technology was invented in 1999, and it’s still
supported by probably 30%+ sites on the web with a ton of newsreader apps… but
it’s had a moribund few years. There are signs of a recent resurgence, of
which this is one. RSS is also the plumbing behind podcast distribution. For
me, RSS is primary way I browse the web. [Want to get started? Here’s
how.](https://aboutfeeds.com))_

In case the Chrome team reads this, I have three requests.

Despite RSS’s strong history and continued usage, at this point I would guess
that new users find it inscrutable, and it’s hard to tell whether a given site
offers an RSS feed or not. Even then, the subscribing experience is not
consistent.

So, if this is going to be a success…

Finally, recognise that the browser is not the best place read RSS feeds long
term. We learnt that last time round.

The browser is a great place to get started, but users need to graduate to
something dedicated as they follow more feeds. So pave that path somehow…
maybe make a user’s subscriptions available as an industry-standard OPML file,
somewhere on the google.com domain? And show users how they can use that
subscriptions list in any one of a whole ecosystem of newsreaders.

[When I suggested three improvements to RSS last
year](/home/2020/07/29/improving_rss), I highlighted (a) onboarding; (b) the
money thing; and (c) discovery.

_The money thing:_ In the Substack era of writers monetising their content,
and with Apple and Spotify both giving podcasts a revenue model, it is
absolutely the right thing to be considering how to extend RSS with a great
premium experience, which means ways to pay, and also private feeds.

_(Jay Springett also makes the connection between[Google, RSS, and
payments](https://www.thejaymo.net/2021/05/23/197-rss-revival/) and points out
that this, strategically, a good way for Google to index content that will
shortly be hidden behind a paywall.)_

There’s a BUT…

Remember that the reason RSS is here _at all_ is that it’s almost religiously
backwards compatible, and incredibly open. Technically, RSS includes an
extension mechanism so take advantage of that, but to succeed, any efforts
needs to be on a bedrock of community collaboration and unwavering commitment
to backwards compatibility, decentralised approaches, and no new points of
failure (people are still angry about [Google
Reader](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Reader) closing in 2013 and
pulling the rug from many readers and publishers).

That said:

Another feature area I would think about is _interactivity._ I’m fascinated
with Google’s work in Gmail around “Inbox Actions” – basically the one-click
buttons to perform an email action like RSVP, or reviewing a bug. [Here’s an
explainer with some examples.](https://postmarkapp.com/guides/improve-your-
transactional-emails-with-gmail-inbox-actions)

Let’s call it _Feed Actions._ Feed Actions could also be an RSS extension.
[Here’s a mockup I made for a talk in 2008.](http://berglondon.com/talks/plastic/?slide=23) What a gift it would be
to the web, to provide an open, centralised way to combine all the different
micro-task inboxes from all the apps I use, all into one place.

GitHub should support something like this for their notifications dashboard,
letting me triage issues straight from the feed; Amazon should support
something like this for open orders, letting me inspect delivery status. It
might be tough to get these into GMail, which is centralised, but as an open
and decentralised standard? Possible.

_(Feed Actions would also be a good way to add an “Upgrade to premium”
button.)_

RSS, as a mechanism to subscribe to content from websites, is still around…
but my take is that it has stagnated. Given the features above (like private,
personalised feeds, with a slick upsell path), it’s worth pushing the envelope
with some new use cases. And, Google, start with your own products.

Like…

Mostly basic stuff but it shows commitment.

With a seat at the table and skin in the game, bang the drum for RSS and the
open web. Like I said, it’s great to see early trials of RSS in the Chrome
mobile browser and, for me, that’s a promising start.

(And if anybody from the Chrome team does run across this post, thanks for
reading!)
