# How about finding new books by mapping who thanks who?

I remember reading [The Red Men](https://uk.bookshop.org/books/the-red-
men-9781905005581/9781905005581) by Matthew De Abaitua, which is near-future
sci-fi (and, in 2021, barely sci-fi at all) about AI and robots, simulated
worlds and algorithms, cults and, um, marketing agencies - it’s an amazing
book, highly recommended - and all the way through I was thinking: _what’s
amazing is that I don’t know this guy._ The themes and the twists on ideas
were just so electric-yet-familiar, like it was directly for me and the people
I knew.

Then I got to De Abaitua’s _Acknowledgements_ on the final page and there,
thanked in the first line, was a key person at his publisher: artist and
writer [James Bridle](https://jamesbridle.com), very much responsible for
shaping what my world was and is thinking about. At the time Bridle and I were
working in physically adjacent studios. _That makes sense,_ I thought.

I’ve just had a similar experience:

After reading _The Institutional Revolution_ by Douglas W Allen (see [my list
of favourite non-fiction read last year](/home/2020/12/28/books)), I’ve been
recommending it far and wide. And I just looked at the back cover, and the
book is blurbed by Tyler Cowen of [Marginal
Revolution](https://marginalrevolution.com) – not someone I know personally,
but the blog is legit one of my favourites reads. It wields economics like a
scalpel for a incisive perspective on all kinds of topics.

Can we flip this?

I would love book recommendations based on acknowledgements and endorsements,
rather than reader ratings.

TWO BRIEF ASIDES.

The best line in _The Red Men_ is this one:

‘I’m giving you a direct order. Take the drug!’

‘This is not the military, Bruno. We work in technology and marketing.’

‘We work in the future!’ screamed Bougas. ‘And this is how the future gets
decided.’

Technology and marketing and hubris. You can see why it spoke to me.

Secondly, Matthew De Abaitua was kind enough to contribute to my old _3 Books
Weekly_ newsletter back in 2016. Here, with blurbs, are [his three book
recommendations.](/home/2016/08/19/3_books)

[CiteSeer](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/index) indexes scientific papers, and
lets you explore by listing papers that also cite the one you’re currently
reading. (And then ranks the papers by how many times _they_ are cited, and so
on.)

CiteSeer first appears in my notes back in 2001, and it was a revelation to be
able to research this way. Search for terms, rank papers by reputation,
explore the siblings in the citation tree to discover alternate points of
view, etc. There used to be a graphical explorer were you could tap and zoom
around the whole citation graph. I can’t find it now.

Google Scholar does something similar. For example: here are the [86
publications that have cited _Mind
Hacks._](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cites=9051334174797045462&as_sdt=2005&sciodt=0,5&hl=en)

There is a whole field of [citation
analysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Citation_analysis), and you can
imagine being able to look for high-level patterns in the scientific
literature like bubbles of groupthink, or multi-year controversies and
schisms. Or perhaps you could build an early warning system for new scientific
paradigms emerging – or spot old ones creaking.

What I’d like is CiteSeer but for books, making using of the softer signals.

**Who does the author thank?** It’s a highly meaningful signal: if they thank
someone I’ve heard of and rate (and _especially_ if it’s someone I know), I am
going to look at this book in a different way. Debut novels often thank other
authors who have helped them along the road, but it’s the non-authors who are
thanked that I find particularly interesting. I always like checking the
_Acknowledgements_ page.

**Who blurbs the book?** Book blurbs aren’t blind marketing. No author wants
to endorse something terrible, and that reputational risk means that blurbs
are meaningful. But also, an author blurbing another author’s book means that
they _know_ each other in some way. They are in the same idea space.

(It would also be neat to extract the bibliography for non-fiction books. I
think the utility of bibliographies goes beyond the citation graph. A
bibliography tells how close this book gets to primary sources, which is a
clue to its originality or how academic it is. And I also get a sense of the
overlap with ideas that I’ve already encountered.)

**I’d like ways to explore the network of influence and gratitude.**

More interesting data to be revealed: Who are the “dark matter” agents,
commissioning editors, and mentor authors, i.e. the people who crop up the
most, in the most popular books?

Recommendations based on this wouldn’t be based on the taste of the average
reader, as star ratings are, but instead reflect the book’s position in idea
space, and what is adjacent to - or deliberately distant from - what I’ve
already read.

It feels like the kind of thing Google Books or Amazon/Goodreads could do.

Google and Amazon both have a massive corpus of scanned books, an existing
database of known titles and authors, plus the requisite machine learning
chops… it would be a good side project for someone there. Let me know if you
have a go and want some early product feedback.
