# City Link, co-determination, and destiny

[The courier firm City Link went into
administration](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-30602829) on Christmas Eve.
We were waiting for some gifts to be delivered, so we went to the Swindon
depot a few days later to pick up the packages.

Pretty bleak as you can imagine. Workers milling around, finding out whether
they’re being officially laid off or not. Staff will get redundancy, but the
deliveries were mostly subcontracted and those folks are at the bottom of the
heap. One guy we met found out about City Link going under just after he
finished his turkey on Christmas Day - when the unions broke the news -
watching the BBC. He’s owed £25k or so, he said he might-as-well have put all
that money he paid for fuel into a big heap and burned it. We heard about
another guy inside, owed £125k for the deliveries he’s done in the 2 or 3
weeks over December, unlikely to see any of it.

It was the RMT union who went public with the City Link news – they had been
informed and asked to keep it quiet. But they also have members in the various
subcontracted companies and they felt it was wrong for those people not to
know.

My first reaction was that the UK should adopt the German system of [co-
determination,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Co-determination) "worker
representatives hold seats on the boards of all companies employing over 500
people."

But although I like _Mitbestimmung,_ thinking a bit more, I’m not so sure it
does what I think we need.

See, [City Link actively encouraged a community of Owner
Drivers.](http://www.city-link.co.uk/ownerdrivers/)

Do you have enthusiasm, determination and ambition? If you would like the
flexibility of being self employed, with the support of a large established
company, choosing to become a Service Delivery Partner with City Link offers
the perfect partnership.

The subcontracting companies weren’t delivery companies that happened to work
for City Link, amongst others –

they were individuals encouraged to start companies with City Link as primary
client… the City Link website says how much they will earn, that they get
training, a uniform… they sound like employees, right?

But then, as an Owner Driver, you lease your van - in City Link livery - under
your own credit; you insure it, you provide safety equipment.

How could you work for anyone else, with a van painted like this?

It makes me see that City Link was run by externalising their risk onto others
– primarily with credit (they receive money for deliveries up-front, Owner
Drivers pay for fuel up-front, but City Link pay later under the terms of the
invoice), and capital expenditure (Owner Drivers lease their own vans and
equipment).

Lots of companies run like this:

Although I’m picking out the downsides, I do not believe that running
companies like this is bad or wrong.

On the contrary, I _like_ that City Link, Uber, Airbnb and the rest are
networks of companies big and small, sharing risk across the whole network.

It breaks down the producer/consumer divide – it’s a kind of Mitbestimmung or
co-determination in its own way. It allows small, agile companies to push back
against the incumbents who use their position to treat us badly. It puts
people closer to their own destiny, it’s a de-alienating force.

This funny mix of heavily meshed companies is what I was getting at the other
day in that [ramble about Ronald Coase and the future of the
firm.](http://interconnected.org/home/2014/12/23/corporations) As the internet
cuts transaction costs, firms will get smaller, and we’ll see a lot more of
this:

So as markets and pricing get easier still, firms can get much smaller – ad
hoc value chains assembled out of code and culture, barely anyone working at
the company at all.

…

The second implication is that the firm, no matter how small, can have a kind
of hinterland of value providers - a community of users who post pictures,
drivers who transport passengers - who, although technically not inside the
firm, are as part of it as a spider’s web is part of the spider, or a beaver’s
artificial lake is part of the colony.

However.

As [software eats the
world,](http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424053111903480904576512250915629460)
and companies get smaller and we enter a networked economy - as the _Coasean
flip_ takes place - there’s a sharp end:

TaskRabbit workers paying the cost of the company pivot. Neighbours of Airbnb
hosts soaking the externality of strangers in their space without choosing to
accept it. Drivers who used to be employees being encouraged to be independent
Owner Drivers - still in City Link livery - bearing the risk of the company’s
capital expenditure and future success… without seeing any of the potential
upside.

And then that risk being cashed in, on Christmas Day after the turkey,
invoices unpaid.

So what can be done?

The commonality here is there is a **new class of worker.**

They’re not inside the company - not benefiting from job security or
healthcare - but their livelihoods in large part are dependent on it, the
transaction cost of moving to a competitor deliberately kept high.

Or the worker is, without seeing any of the upside of success, taking on the
risk or bearing the cost of the company’s expansion and operation.

These aren’t just subcontractors or employees-by-another-name, they feel like
something new.

So I’m looking for a mechanism to govern the relationship between the company
and its worker-community. Something that fulfils these goals:

The premise is that it’s fine to share the risk, otherwise small companies
could never do weird ambitious things – but it needs to be equitable.

[reddit’s scheme to give company equity to the
community](http://interconnected.org/home/2014/12/22/ramble_about_bitcoin) is
good. So something like that? It’s interesting, maybe similar to what [the
Guardian are reaching for with
mutualisation…](http://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/mutualisation-
vision-collaboration-participation-media)

but maybe a bit hard to implement, until the right toolkit exists? I don’t
like regulation. Regulation increases friction. I don’t want to inhibit
something that - on the whole - feels like it’s going in the right direction:
I’m pro the Coasean flip to a networked working world. I’d prefer to _reduce
friction_ along the vector of Doing The Right Thing.

What about, simply, inventing a proper word for this “worker community” and
making a code of conduct that companies can sign up for, to make it clear that
this genuinely is a community of Worker Owners who share in the risk and
upside both, not virtual residents of a virtual company town, buying goods
from the company store with company scrip.

The code of conduct could start small: Payments could be made using escrow,
instead of 30 day invoicing terms like regular suppliers. Stock options could
be traded one-for-one between the company and the Worker Owner’s company.
Working for competitors could be explicitly allowed.

I don’t know.

But it would be a fascinating thought experiment, to draft a code of conduct
that would be equally applicable to Uber, City Link, and Airbnb. The test
would be whether their worker communities would grow _faster_ because of it,
without unduly slowing the company’s expansion.

Measure first.

If you don’t have some kind of measurement - some kind of metric or indicator

- you can’t see what effect you’re having. So there’s no feedback and you
  can’t improve what you’re doing.

The right kind of metric will provoke interesting forward conversations, and
reveal interesting experiments. Even if, to begin with, the metric is
inadequate.

For every person, I’d love a measure of how many other people’s financial
destiny they control.

So… let’s say a company pays 100 people, and none of those people have any
other income. The company has four equal shareholders, so each shareholder has
25% each. The shareholders have no other shares in other companies, and
receive no other income.

In this case, each shareholder controls 25 peoples-worth financial destiny.

Let’s say I pay three freelancers. For each of them, I am responsible for a
tenth of their annual income. This year, I control 0.3 peoples-worth financial
destiny.

That’s how it would work. You would work it out using invoices, income or
revenue, payroll, and shares.

What would it mean, to have this balance sheet for financial destiny?

What if we said it should be capped at 1,000? Nobody should be allowed to have
that much control other other humans. That means, for a 10,000 person company,
no single shareholder should have more than 10% of the shares.

What if it was capped at 100?

What if we based taxes on it… what would a progressive destiny tax look like?

What does too-big-to-fail look like, for destiny? Does the measure need to be
moderated where there are barriers to switching jobs? If we made visible such
a destiny network, could we test trickle-down? Could we identify geographic
economies and see if local currencies work?

Regulation and governance are not about stopping things happening or slowing
things down. Governance is also the system of eyes and senses that we build,
as a society, so we can see ourselves as in a mirror – and work to accelerate
what we endorse.

We’re entering a new, networked world where the old categories of companies
and consumers no longer apply. We need to find new frames of reference or
we’re flying blind.
