# When will we see the first home dishwasher cobots?

Sometime while I wasn’t paying attention, robotics got really good. But mainly
in industrial settings. So beyond Roomba, how do robots come into the home?

The trend I’m tracking is **cobots** \- _collaborative robots_ \- originated
by James Colgate and Michael Peshkin at Northwestern University in 1996. From
[their homepage](https://peshkin.mech.northwestern.edu/cobot/), a cobot is "a
robot for direct physical interaction with a human user, within a shared
workspace."

The [cobots patent](https://patents.google.com/patent/US5952796) makes the
supporting role clearer: "cobots guide, redirect, or steer motions that
originate with the person."

Although _“cobot”_ is a general approach, the typical approach seems to be a
robot arm with sufficient sensors to avoid workplace injury.

For example, here’s [Universal Robots explaining the benefits of
cobots](https://www.universal-robots.com/products/collaborative-robots-cobots-
benefits/) on assembly lines:

**The difference in approach between regular robotic automation and a cobot is
fundamental.** It’s the familiar promise of automation, but _without_ having
to move to a 100% automated production line. So you could imagine, putting up
a fence, you could have a cobot lean in to just punch in all the nails in all
the right places while you hold the plank in place (which means your team size
is reduced to only one human), but you don’t need to swap out to a massive
fence-construction-machine.

ALSO fascinating is that these cobot snake arms generally come as general
purpose platforms for which you develop “apps”. So…

I’d like a cobot at home. They’re safe and portable, that’s the promise.

So maybe I could place my safe, portable cobot in the floor in the front room,
and it would pick up all the toys and tidy them away, shelve any books, and
find the TV remote control and put it back in the regular place.

What I like is that we inhabit the same space, and I think of the distinction
like this:

_While we’re on dream apps for domestic cobot arms:_

I open my (physical) post approx every 12 months. I pile it up over the year.
It’s a pretty mechanical process to recognise each item, sort and stack it,
and to pile up the recycling. If it could read the addresses, show me each
unrecognised item (remembering my response for later), and run the batch
process, that would cut a good few hours out of preparing my tax return.

How will the cobot be domesticated?

The mainframe was domesticated as the personal computer, and the PC was
dismissed as a toy – and then came spreadsheets and then came desktop
publishing, killer apps both.

So what’s the first home-use programmable cobot that seems ludicrous to begin
with, but establishes a beachhead?

Part of me wonders whether it will be cooking: kneading dough, sitting by the
stove to flip pancakes, using sensitive fingers and eyes to cook the perfect
steak, and so on. It could even wash its own hands.

But the kitchen is a pretty inhospitable first environment.

Perhaps the first use is for hobbyists? Imagine painting miniature figures –
hey arm, hold this; pass me the cobalt; rinse this brush and put it back. Or
fixing a bike. Or assembling Ikea furniture.

None of these routes feels quite believable to me. But my takeaway is that the
blocker is market entry. The technology is all there. If there are teams
working on consumer smart glasses in readiness of them becoming commercially
viable (which there clearly are) then I hope there are teams working on
consumer cobot arms.

I subscribe to a small handful of blogs which track the latest in robotics
(thank you [RSS](https://aboutfeeds.com)).

Recommendations welcome.

Also a shout-out to Robin Sloan’s 2018 novel
[Sourdough](https://uk.bookshop.org/books/sourdough/9781250316684) which,
behind its deceptively gentle facade, is an exploration of human/non-human
cooperation and where agency lies, whether that’s yeast or - relevant here -
robot arms. _(Or even machine learning, given that’s how Sloan collaborated
to[compose the fictional music of the
Mazg](https://www.mcdbooks.com/features/sourdough) for the audiobook.)_
