# Hardware-ish coffee morning tomorrow

_[Short version: Coffee morning on Thurs 14 April in Old St! I sent this out
to the coffee morning newsletter last week.[Subscribe to the newsletter
here.](http://tinyletter.com/coffeemorning)]_

My Dearest Droogs,

We haven’t had a hardware-ish coffee morning at all this year. I’ve had no
Thursdays because I’ve been avec job for a few months earning coins. I know, I
know, but it happens to all of us sometimes. Still, done with that now, and
fingers crossed I can avoid gainful employment for a little while longer.

Let’s hang out and drink too much coffee and talk about hardware! Same bat-
time, same bat-channel:

**Thursday 14 April, 9.30am** for a couple of hours, at the [Book
Club](http://www.wearetbc.com) (100 Leonard St).

Same old format… If you’re curious about, or working in… designing physical
things, paper or weird sensors, installations, knitting, manufacturing,
internet-connected doodads, retail for hardware startups, sculpture,
investment, or whatever, please come along.

There’s no formal intros so it’s easy to sneak off if everyone is horrendous.
(They’re mostly not.) Come say hi to me when you turn up, and we’ll make sure
you chat with interesting folks. (Most everyone is interesting.) Everyone
loves prototypes, so bring em along if you have em. There are usually one or
two.

If you’re a woman, or don’t present or identify as a dude, please do feel
welcome. It’s a concern to me that this tech industry, while very human and
egalitarian in its early days (this goes for mainstream tech and hardware
startups too) appears to heavily skew to Mainly Dudes as time goes on. That’s
something I can push against, a tiny bit, by trying to ensure these coffee
mornings don’t go the same way.

(On which serious note: If you don’t feel you would be welcome - obviously or
in hidden ways - at a hardware-ish coffee morning, and you’d be willing to
share your feedback privately with ideas of how I could improve the format,
I’d like to hear. My personal email is matt AT interconnected DOT org. Thank
you!)

See you on the 14th!

Matt

ps. I’ve got a new hobby and it’s a robot bookshop that tweets. You can visit
it! Here it is. It’s called [Machine
Supply](http://machine.supply/machines/campus).
