# Hardware-ish coffee morning, Thursday 15th

I am BACK FROM MY SUMMER HOLS, it’s raining outside, and I am in the mood to
hang out with hardware folks. Let’s have a hardware-ish coffee morning?

**Thursday 15 September, 9.30am for a couple of hours, at[the Book
Club](http://www.wearetbc.com), 100 Leonard St.**

(Timed to follow the Internet of Things conference
[ThingMonk](http://thingmonk.com), so if you’re in town for that, do come and
hang out for coffee too.)

Usual drill… there’s no standing up and doing intros, or anything super
formal. We just meet in a convenient cafe and hang out. Folks are often
involved in the hardware scene somehow, whether it’s making stuff for a hobby,
figuring out how to do manufacturing, or in the middle of their Kickstarter
campaign. All pretty chilled. Bring prototypes if you got em.

tbh it might just be me and thee. But that’s fine, we’ll have a cuppa and have
a chat.

I have a secret agenda – I’m heading up [R/GA’s newest startup
accelerator](http://www.wired.co.uk/article/rga-accelerator-launch-uk) and
we’re focusing on hardware and Internet of Things startups. Announcement was
just the other day. So I’m thinking about what kind of support startups really
need, and I’m talking to as many people as possible about that.

See you on the 15th!

ps. for email updates about hardware-ish coffee mornings, [subscribe to the
mailing list.](http://tinyletter.com/coffeemorning)

Okay okay okay, let’s have one more hardware-ish coffee morning to wrap up
2016…

**Thursday 15 December, 9.30am for a couple of hours, at[the Book
Club](http://www.wearetbc.com), 100 Leonard St.**

You know the score: No intros, no presentations. Just a corner at a handy cafe
and seriously talk to EVERYONE it’s worth it. Bring prototypes if you have em,
and if you don’t then your good self is enough… [More info
here.](http://interconnected.org/home/2016/11/03/coffee_morning)

Might be 5 people, might be 25, might be just me and my email. Feel especially
welcome if you are NOT A DUDE because it’s weird otherwise. All super relaxed
and friendly. I’ll bring Christmas crackers if I remember and we can all wear
hats.

See you on the 15th!

ps. for email updates about hardware-ish coffee mornings, [join to the mailing
list.](http://tinyletter.com/coffeemorning)

Time for a hardware-ish coffee morning…

**Thursday 10 November, 9.30am for a couple of hours, at[the Book
Club](http://www.wearetbc.com), 100 Leonard St.**

You know the score: No intros, no presentations. Just a corner at a handy cafe
and seriously talk to EVERYONE it’s worth it. Bring prototypes if you have em,
and if you don’t then your good self is enough… especially if you’re
interested in hardware, discovering spectacular new business models that make
delivering hardware worth it ([sigh](https://medium.com/make-it-think/open-
letter-5fdc0e46c29e)), Kickstarter, how to get to manufacture, tinkering, etc,
etc.

Sometimes there are four of us, sometimes 14. Once there were 24. All super
relaxed and friendly. Come along!

_(This coffee morning is on request. Somebody got in touch because they want
to bring some early protos. Awesome!)_

My secret agenda – I’m heading up [R/GA’s newest startup
program](http://www.wired.co.uk/article/rga-accelerator-launch-uk) and we’re
investing in hardware and Internet of Things companies. I’m on the hunt for
great startups. But if you’re interested in the program, don’t feel you need
to come to this… coffee morning is about hanging out with everyone there, not
about me. To talk program stuff, we can always Skype. [Book a time
here.](https://rgaiotventurestudioukoh.youcanbook.me)

See you on the 10th!

ps. for email updates about hardware-ish coffee mornings, [join to the mailing
list.](http://tinyletter.com/coffeemorning)
