# Coffee morning two

So the [first coffee morning was
fun.](http://interconnected.org/home/2014/11/25/hardware_coffee_morning) That
was last week. Who’s up for doing it again?

**9.30 for a couple hours, Thursday 4th December,[the Book
Club](http://www.wearetbc.com) in Old St.**

Same as before… zero structure, people talking to people about products or
hardware or burgers or hobbies. Ok so I’m saying that because I want to talk
about hobbies.

I’ve sort of vaguely been saying to people I’ve met over the last week or so
that there’s coffee happening, so there might be a few people coming and
going.

Or it might be me doing my email on my own and getting steadily over-
caffeinated, which I happily do too, and if you see that happening then do
come join me.

It would be lovely to see you! Don’t be shy.

[Coffee morning
two](http://interconnected.org/home/2014/11/28/coffee_morning_two) was this
morning – great to see [Bethany,](http://www.techwillsaveus.com)
[Mark,](http://www.markchampkins.com) [Matt,](http://www.bareconductive.com)
Pierre, [David,](http://www.winnowsolutions.com) and
[Tom.](http://infovore.org) Thanks for coming!

Again… Too Many Dudes. I totally need to work on this.

What was it like? It turns out that both Bethany and I showed up early to do
some email, so tap tap tap. Then Mark joined (Mark has just made an
[organically opening lamp shade](http://www.markchampkins.com/products/open-
up-lamp/) at the Science Museum) so we shut our laptops and started chatting.
Pierre I didn’t know, so I’m really pleased he showed up, and Matt was told
about the coffee morning by Mark so I’m also pleased he came.

Matt is from Bare Conductive which makes conductive ink and [electronics that
integrates with it.](http://www.bareconductive.com/shop/touch-board/) He told
us this morning that "in our studio, the light switches are painted on. You
touch the wall and the light turns on."

Also their electronics board tells you how it works. Like, with a voice. The
first time you turn it on, you plug in some headphones, touch a button, and it
speaks to you – instructions, setup, etc. This anecdote came up while we were
discussing creativity and R&D in a product company: What’s the right balance
between exploring new ideas, and refining the product?

David from Winnow gave another example… their internet-connected scales help
commercial kitchens avoid food waste. The beta version of their software uses
realtime weather forecasts to tell chefs if it’s going to be raining at
lunchtime (if they know it’s going to be raining, they’ll prepare less food).
Wonderful feature, totally in line with the mission. How do you make time to
discover these new ideas, when you’re also working on scaling the product?

Also discussed was the news that it looks like the [flagship Maker Faire in
London,](http://makezine.com/2014/03/10/announcing-our-third-flagship-maker-
faire-london/) planned for 2015, is no longer happening. Sad news if they
can’t find a new venue and the right support.

I liked today, and I think what I like is that there can be many conversations
all at once; a coffee morning is resolutely informal.

There’s also, for me, a hint that these coffee mornings could be a place where
paths cross - not a “community” or group - gossip rather than knowledge, a
street rather than a salon. That feels like the kind of thing I’d like to
foster right now.

So I’ll keep doing it I think.

Pencil in Thursday December 18th, 9.30 till whenever, at the Book Club again.
I’ll confirm nearer the time, but that’s 90% certain as of today. Hopefully
see you there.
