# Minutes of hardware-ish coffee morning, edition 12

Hardware-ish coffee morning last week was AWESOME. Thank you for coming - in
no particular order - [Nathan](https://twitter.com/nathannmiller),
[Nat](http://ntlk.net) who has just launched a new invention studio called
[Buckley Williams](http://buckleywilliams.com), Maximilian and Heinrich from
[Kazendi](http://www.kazendi.com), Rob who is behind the [Ockham
Razor](http://www.ockhamrazorcompany.com), creative hardware engineer
[Saar](http://www.boldport.com), Grace from manufacturer [PCH
International](http://www.pchintl.com), the [Tingbot](http://tingbot.com)
massive - which is launching on Kickstarter in a matter of hours -
[Ben](http://benpawle.co.uk) and [Joe](https://github.com/joerick) and [Ken
from Nord](http://nordcollective.com), Naomi and Nick who make [biofeedback
games to regulate breathing at
Shift](http://www.shiftdesign.org.uk/products/biofeedback-video-game/), Josh
(hardware accelerator [Hardware Pro](http://www.hardwarepro.co)), Ines
(hardware investor [C4V](http://www.c4v.com)),
[Tony](https://twitter.com/tonyto85) and
[Christiaan](https://twitter.com/chendriksen) of the accelerating meteor Pact
Coffee which recently successfully launched [Nespresso-compatible speciality
coffee on Kickstarter](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/600258854/the-
best-coffee-youve-ever-made-now-in-a-pod), David of [Pixie
Labs](http://pixielabs.co.uk), [No Mayo Digital](http://no-mayo.digital)‘s
Izzy and Clare, shipped-hardware-product [BleepBleeps](http://bleepbleeps.com)
founder Tom, hardware-to-software maker another [Tom](http://tomarmitage.com),
Chelsea who is behind the [Olly](http://heyolly.com) table-top robot currently
in development, and [OpenSensors](https://www.opensensors.io) Internet of
Things platform founder Yodit. _And breathe out._

What an amazing group for chitter-chatter and caffeine!

Including me that’s 24 people, and a quick stat – we’re down to two thirds
(16) who would probably identify as dudes. Which is not perfect but better
than it has been, and on the right trend. Going by my gut, it seems that
[female founders are a better part of the mix in hardware
startups](http://mattturck.com/2014/01/08/the-rise-of-the-female-hardware-
entrepreneur/) than tech at large, and I hope that goes for inclusivity of all
kinds. Whether or not my gut feeling is correct, I certainly _want_ the London
hardware community to be a leading edge of London’s inclusivity, and that’s
why I track the NADQ at this coffee mornings.

_NADQ = Not A Dude Quotient._

So if you’re a woman or not a down-the-line dude, thanks for coming! If you
invited someone, thanks! I know it’s a bit weird to keep calling out my coffee
morning NADQ like this, but trust me it’s weirder when I sit round a table
with six other men on a Thursday morning.

There were a _ton_ of new people today. That was lovely to see.

Honestly who knows what was discussed.

Hardware-ish coffee morning sprawled over about five tables, with double that
many conversations and people continually moving round. I have no idea what
people talked about. But I had to leave just after 11 and people were still
going!

I was darting about like a headless chicken so I didn’t get to say hi to
_anyone_ and my attention was always elsewhere. BOOOOO. And sorry to everyone
I know that I didn’t get to chat with!

BUT a couple of things I did notice.

What’s also interesting to me is that we had pre, post, and _intermezzo_
Kickstarter projects present, from both small and pretty seriously established
companies, plus investors and manufacturing. A maturing scene. There’s a lot
of knowledge in the room.

…to the point that, discussing one project that is imminently adding hardware
to their existing software-only offer, I can assemble the roadmap with them,
50% from my own knowledge (what the critical proof-points and bottlenecks are,
what needs to happen hand-in-hand with what), and 50% simply from looking
around and going: Well, first do it like company X, and then do product
development like company Y, and finally you will end up speaking with someone
like company Z and here are the questions to ask.

Let’s have one more hardware-ish coffee morning this side of the new year.
I’ll take a look at my calendar and see if I can pick a Thursday which won’t
be too conflicted with the holidays. [Join the email announce
list](http://tinyletter.com/coffeemorning), I’ll send a note there to arrange
it.

**UPDATE:** [Tingbot is now on
Kickstarter!](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/744235676/tingbot-
raspberry-pi-made-fun) Go read more about it there. And please back it, I want
a Tingbot of my own.

Pretty amazing hardware-ish coffee morning yesterday.

Plenty of people present packing products or physical prototypes:

Catlyn and Daniel from [BuffaloGrid](http://buffalogrid.com/) with their
ruggedised battery for simultaneous charging of 20 smartphones. Carried out to
communities that agents are visiting anyway (e.g. for banking or deliveries),
each port activated individually and paid for by SMS. So there’s a business
model and neat distribution. Currently running a trial in India.

Tempest from [Science Practice](http://science-practice.com) and their super
low-cost sensor (like, it costs _pennies_) for testing soil chemistry, and
choosing simply what fertiliser to apply. Uses chips with microfluidics. This
is actual cutting edge science. Amazing.

Matas of [Vai Kai](http://vaikai.com) from Berlin with wooden dolls for kids.
The dolls sense and react to one another, and connect over the internet.
They’re made for open play. Currently accepting pre-orders. Matas came along
with Kaye and Richard from [Paved With Gold](http://pavedwithgold.co), who
have helped several startups market their new products.

Amir from [Flitch](http://flitch.io) which is an Android phone case which is
also a games controller… and it’s slightly magical: There is no battery, and
no connector. It harvests energy from the NFC reader of the phone, and
transmits the controller movements back over the same channel.

Pretty good for an event-which-isn’t-an-event! We did the usual – just
colonised a few tables in the cafe, hung out, chatted.

Also we had: Avril and John who are behind the [Ding Smart
Doorbell](http://www.onnstudio.com/the-ding-smart-doorbell/) which recently
won the [Design Council Spark](http://www.designcouncil.org.uk/what-we-
do/design-council-spark) innovation programme (and now they’re making the
thing); Marc who organises [London’s Mini Maker
Faire](https://twitter.com/makerfaireec); Tom from
[Autodesk](http://www.autodesk.com) who it is super great to see in the scene;
Pierre, Jonathon, Lloyd, and Ezo.

That’s only 4 out of 16 who aren’t dudes. Not great. I’m going to use the new
year to attempt a bit of a cultural reset, maybe change the location or the
way I organise these things. HOWEVER – that’s my fault, not the fault of
everyone who came. And so:

Thank you everyone who has come to a hardware-ish coffee morning over 2015,
both here in London and our special event in San Francisco! Probably 100 or so
folks? The reason it’s fun for everyone else is because _you_ are there. It’s
been brilliant eavesdropping on the connections being made and the
conversations being had. Always surprises and serendipity.

So let’s kick off again in 2016 - [join the mailing list if you want
updates](http://tinyletter.com/coffeemorning) \- and in the meantime, coffee
morning gang, happy holidays.
