# Comment on Internet of Things terminology

[Dan Hon commented:](http://tinyletter.com/danhon/letters/episode-one-hundred-
and-eighty-nine-ops-not-apps-the-internet-of-things-reviewing-reviewing-a-
year-in-review) "The thing - ha - about the internet-of-things is that it’s a
weird descriptor."

from a consumer point of view, for most things, why would it have wifi if it
_couldn’t_ be connected, in some way, to the internet? Which is sort of the
position that all of this IoT business is a temporary blip and that instead
you’ll just be looking for “doorbells” or “lightbulbs” or “locks” and you
won’t really get a choice about whether they “come with internet” or not.

I’ll go with that. _The internet won’t stay trapped behind glass._ – That was
a useful encapsulation to explain what we were doing with [Berg
Cloud.](http://blog.bergcloud.com)

Of _course_ lightbulbs should be networked. But my hunch is that - with
connectivity - we’ll find new products that means that we no longer focus on
light bulbs per se. Maybe connectivity will mean that we’ll buy “lighting,”
verbs not nouns.

I guess the scale of the difference I mean is like software. Which, when
networked, became social. Our global village.

And it won’t necessarily be an “internet” and an “internet of things” but
still, just, and only, the internet, at least I hope so, because the whole
point of the internet - or at least, just _one_ of the points of the internet
is that things can link from one thing to another thing and that’s why the
superset - the internet of networks of things - will be the one that wins.
Hopefully.

So I have some very rough mental models that I use, now I’m officially
[exploring the Internet of
Things.](https://gds.blog.gov.uk/2015/01/19/exploring-the-internet-of-things/)

Here’s the working definition I have in my notebook: _We see the internet of
things wherever a physical thing is connected by some kind of data carrying
link to a computer capable of running software._

I’m casting a wide net – we’ve built a lot of infrastructure (train platform
signage, building facilities) that we don’t call IOT but it is. Or it’s close
to being so. Why is this good?

So given my working definition, I need to refer to two types of connectivity:

I can think of lots of things that would benefit from connectivity without
backhaul. I’d like to be able to orchestrate the behaviour of all the
lightbulbs in my house, for example; remote control from the open internet is
a bonus.

Then back to Dan’s original point… "and that’s why the superset - the internet
of networks of things - will be the one that wins. Hopefully."

Hopefully. Maybe. But where my mental model takes me is to draw analogies with
dumb unconnected stuff… my home. And I like that there are doors, that close,
and windows that are see-through but with curtains; I can leave the phone off
the hook and pull the plug on the wi-fi. There are switch by walls where my
hand finds them, and those hidden at the back of the cupboard by the stove.
These aren’t just security models – they’re ways of making sense of the stuff
I have in my life.

Still I go back the connected lightbulb and it’s eventual value. To discover
the it might require building out the whole Internet of Things first… the
World Wide Web was already 7 years old by the time Blogger.com launched and so
discovered the real value of the medium.

And _maybe_ that’ll require the open internet and all that implies. I hope so
too but I think we have to make that case from value, because it’s not
necessary.
