# Consensus cosmogony

Back in the golden age of pulp science fiction - the 1950s - there was an
accepted view of what the future looked like. Wikipedia gives the run down as
part of the [article on Isaac Asimov’s Galactic
Empire:](<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galactic_Empire_(Isaac_Asimov)#Consensus_cosmogony>)

GIVEN THIS, you, a reader, could situate yourself in the future – you knew
where a given story fit in.

[The Western was not a
genre](http://interconnected.org/home/2014/11/30/star_wars) – it was a
consensus cosmogony.

What’s special about the sci-fi future history is that the Space Race fit in:
We weren’t _just_ going into orbit and going to the Moon… we were taking the
first step on Noble Eightfold Path to human occupation of the galaxy.

So we have all kinds of consensus understandings of what the future looks
like, how we’ll get there, and what the first steps are. When consensus is
strong, it’s an almighty power for coordination. For pulling in the same
direction.

Or the picture is one of doom. I grew up in the waning years of the Cold War;
I _knew_ I’d one day live in a post-apocalypse nuclear wasteland. We have a
different consensus on the end of the world now: [the
jackpot,](http://www.tor.com/blogs/2014/10/the-peripheral-spoiler-review) "the
changing climate: droughts, water shortages, crop failures, honeybees gone
like they almost were now, collapse of other keystone species, every last
alpha predator gone, antibiotics doing even less than they already did," but a
world in which the oligarchs survive in "a brave new world transformed by
nanobots, clean energy, new drugs."

I think Silicon Valley is a consensus cosmogony. Part of the consensus is that
geography matters. My weakly-held hunch: That’s why it’s so hard to make
small-s silicon small-v valleys elsewhere, ones that share that ambition and
the success.

[(The Californian
Ideology.)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Californian_Ideology)

I’m glad I stumbled across the term _cosmogony_ because it gives a name to
what I do when I find myself in a new organisation, socio-economic network,
consultancy gig, value chain, whatever. I call it mapping or orienting, but
really I’m not doing that. I’m looking for something:

What is the consensus cosmogony of the Internet of Things? What is its future?
What does the consensus understand are the first steps?

I’m not trying to figure out the rights and wrongs. I’m just trying to
understand the grain of what we understand and what we expect.
