# Some rambling thoughts about the stuttering end of the last ice age and what lockdown means

The last ice age ended just under 15,000 years ago. The world got warm and
wet. Nomadic hunters settled down into villages, the population took off,
people were living in Europe.

And then… the ice age returned, a thousand years of cold and drought, and it
all changed. That’s the Younger Dryas.

After that, around 9,600 BC, the ice age _actually_ ended this time. Warm and
wet again, more or less the climate we know now. [Here’s a
graph.](http://interconnected.org/notes/2006/02/scifi/?p=33)

Stephen Mithen’s [After the
Ice](https://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674019997) is an
archeological human history spanning 20,000–5,000 BC.

This story describing Mesopotamia has stuck in my head since I read it. As the
Younger Dryas happens, animals get scarcer and the villages disband. And:

Wealth and power had evidently been dependent on sedentary village life. This
provided the elite with the opportunity to control the trade that brought
seashells and other items to the villages. A return to mobile lifestyles swept
away the power base and society became egalitarian once again … The shells had
lost their value because there was no longer any control over their
distribution – mobile hunter-gatherers were able to collect seashells for
themselves and trade with whom they wished.

No more elite! No more bosses, no more proles!

This is deduced from looking at burial rituals.

I can’t help but think of this during this lockdown. It’s hard not to see
Covid-19 as part of the beginning of an era of pandemics – species jumpers in
the wet markets, antibiotic resistent resurgences, escapees from biolabs,
ancient viruses steamed out of newly-thawed permafrost, prions… god [let’s not
even think about
prions](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskReddit/comments/48ujhq/whats_the_scariest_real_thing_on_our_earth/):

They’re tiny, highly-infectious particles that occur when protein molecules
found in the nervous system misfold. Once a single bad prion enters a healthy
person or animal, it causes all of the properly-folded proteins around it to
misfold as well.

And: "You can boil a prion, dip it in acid, soak it in alcohol, and expose it
to radiation, and the prion will still be infectious."

In the future, we maybe won’t name our generations Boomers, Millennials, etc,
we’ll name them after whatever global lockdown was responsible for the baby
boom that they were born in. (And if we don’t name the upcoming round of
coronavirus-lockdown-babies the _ca-boomers_ I for one will be sorely
disappointed.)

Even if we don’t get another lockdown for 10 years, the fact it’s a _maybe_
means that our behaviour will change to account for the possibility.

So I wonder about the long-term effects not of lockdown itself, but the
continuous _risk_ of lockdown. Like, will you book a holiday for 6 months
time, or will you book simply the _option_ to go somewhere? Would you ever
start a business that had a reliance on in-person meetings, or a supply chain
that wasn’t tolerant to an unexpected 3 month stop? Of course not. How do you
invest in friendships? Do you ever move far away from ageing parents if
there’s a risk that planes won’t fly – or does distance no longer matter when
you wouldn’t be able to meet in person anyway?

And what does all of that mean? How do you act when, at any moment, the
physical speed limit of the planet might drop to walking pace?

I think that’s what makes me think of the Younger Dryas: environment creates
power hierarchies creates culture. So when our environment changes…

Like: right now I’m interacting with strangers less. My world has contracted
to my neighbourhood. I’m not randomly meeting friends of friends at events.
But I _am_ connecting with certain friends in very small groups more often,
and I _am_ investing a lot more time in “continuous partial” connection with
my family. And when I _am_ meeting strangers, because it’s generally 1:1 on a
video call, I’m spending more time and making a deeper connection.

What previous power hierarchies have been disrupted? What previously valuable
seashells are now available for anyone to grab? What _new_ power hierarchies
are being created?

Here’s a minor one, and this is what I mean because it’s both the society-
level things and also the everyday…

[‘Big’ men: Male leaders’ height positively relates to followers’ perception
of
charisma](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0191886913012178):
"Physical height is associated with beneficial outcomes for the tall
individual (e.g., higher salary and likelihood of occupying a leadership
position)."

BUT: if we interact over video calls and can’t tell height, what then?
