# Post at 17.40, on Thursday 3 Mar 2011

Conviviality:

"People need not only to obtain things, they need above all the freedom to
make things among which they can live, to give shape to them according to
their own tastes, and to put them to use in caring for and about others.
Prisoners in rich countries often have access to more things and services than
members of their families, but they have no say in how things are to be made
and cannot decide what to do with them. Their punishment consists in being
deprived of what I shall call 'conviviality.' They are degraded to the status
of mere consumers."

"I choose the term 'conviviality' to designate the opposite of industrial
productivity. I intend it to mean autonomous and creative intercourse among
persons, and the intercourse of persons with their environment; and this in
contrast with the conditioned response of persons to the demands made upon
them by others, and by a man-made environment. _I consider conviviality to be
individual freedom realized in personal interdependence_ and, as such, an
intrinsic ethical value. I believe that, in any society, _as conviviality is
reduced below a certain level, no amount of industrial productivity can
effectively satisfy the needs it creates among society's members._"

And so: "To formulate a theory about a future society both very modern and not
dominated by industry, it will be necessary to recognize natural scales and
limits. We must come to admit that only within limits can machines take the
place of slaves; beyond these limits they lead to a new kind of serfdom. Only
within limits can education fit people into a man-made environment: beyond
these limits lies the universal schoolhouse, hospital ward, or prison. Only
within limits ought politics to be concerned with the distribution of maximum
industrial outputs, rather than with equal inputs of either energy or
information. Once these limits are recognized, it becomes possible to
articulate the triadic relationship between persons, tools, and a new
collectivity. Such a society, in which modern technologies serve politically
interrelated individuals rather than managers, I will call 'convivial.'"

\-- [Tools for
Conviviality,](http://www.opencollector.org/history/homebrew/tools.html "Essay. Digesting.") Ivan Illich (1972).
