# On conversational UIs

When trumpets were mellow

And every gal only had one fellow

No need to remember when

‘Cause everything old is new again

– [Peter Allen.](http://genius.com/Peter-allen-everything-old-is-new-again-
lyrics)

Stand back folks. I’ve not spent any time editing and now I’m going out. This
is stream of consciousness, and it’s _long._

There’s that bit in the great article on [Chinese mobile UI
trends](http://dangrover.com/blog/2014/12/01/chinese-mobile-app-ui-
trends.html) about how there are no websites, there’s just messaging. And not
only that, some weird mish-mash of talking robots and customer service people:

Many institutions that otherwise would have native apps or mobile sites have
opted instead for official accounts. You can send any kind of message (text,
image, voice, etc), and they’ll reply, either in an automated fashion or by
routing it to a human somewhere. The interface is exactly the same as for
chatting with your friends

You know, and why the hell not. I have one language to use with apps
(pointing, tapping, swiping) and another with my friends (chatting). Why not
chat with my apps too?

So as Benedict Evans - mobile and technology analyst extraordinaire - points
out, [messaging is the new app platform:](http://ben-
evans.com/benedictevans/2015/3/24/the-state-of-messaging)

[In WeChat, in China] You can send money, order a cab, book a restaurant or
track and manage an ecommerce order, all within one social app. So, like the
web, you don’t need to install new apps to access these services, but, unlike
the web, they can also use push and messaging and social to spread.

The other piece of the puzzle here, Evans continues, is the smartphone
notifications panel:

That pull-down panel aggregates activity from everything on your phone, and
Google and Apple have made notifications actionable and given them payloads. …
More and more, one’s primary interaction with any app, social messaging or
otherwise, is a little pop-up with a button or two.

So I’ve long been interested in the idea that “next actions” should float away
from their apps and come together in a single place… [SNAP was my 2008 take on
this.](http://berglondon.com/blog/2008/02/06/snap/)

But I guess the 2015 twist is that everything old is new again, and we’re
dealing not just with actionable notifications, but robot-generated text that
we can have an actual conversation with.

Which is Twitter’s fault.

Nowhere is it more evident that [The Web is a Customer Service
Medium.](http://www.ftrain.com/wwic.html) Just look at
[@AskNationwide](https://twitter.com/AskNationwide/with_replies) (with
replies) or
[@British_Airways](https://twitter.com/British_Airways/with_replies) (with
replies). It’s all conversations with customers.

The canonical automated version of this is @andy_house (2009), aka [the house
that twitters](http://stanford-clark.com/house_that_twitters.html), or see
[House of Coates](http://www.technologyreview.com/news/514941/home-tweet-home-
a-house-with-its-own-voice-on-twitter/) for a more up-to-date take on the
tweeting smart home.

Now imagine it wasn’t just an activity feed, but you could talk back.

A big bit of the current excitement is the [rise of Slack for workplace
comms](http://www.theverge.com/2014/8/12/5991005/slack-is-killing-email-yes-
really) and its [embrace of bots.](https://api.slack.com/bot-users) Which
takes us to Ben Brown’s insanely incredible insight: [What happens when you
start automating workplace processes?](https://medium.com/why-not/what-will-
the-automated-workplace-look-like-495f9d1e87da)

What if there was a meeting runner bot that automatically sent out an agenda
to all attendees before the meeting, then collected, collated and delivered
updates to team members? It could make meetings shorter and more productive by
reducing the time needed to bring everyone up to speed.

We’ve just been through an era where management has been regarded as the
essential scarce resource of a business, and operations and technology are
functions to be outsourced to fungible workers like so many cogs. But what if
the core business resource is human ingenuity, and it’s management that can be
turned into software… automated and optimised?

[Digit](https://digit.co) is an automated savings tool: "Every few days, Digit
checks your spending habits and removes a few dollars from your checking
account if you can afford it."

The kicker: You communicate with it via text message (“Great, I’ve moved
$10.00 to digit”), they have no plans for an app. And what’s interesting to me
is that it has adaptive behaviour… and maybe because of the text message
interface, [this Digit
review](http://www.theverge.com/2015/2/19/8064431/digit-is-the-automated-
savings-plan-we-ve-been-waiting-for) semi-anthropomorphises the software:

At first, Digit was really cautious with my money … But over the next couple
weeks, as my balance recovered from holiday spending, it got a bit more
ambitious

Software isn’t “cautious” or “ambitious”, those are qualities of alive beings.
But maybe it serves us to think so.

[Walkadoo](https://walkadoo.meyouhealth.com) is a walking game that encourages
activity; you communicate with it by text message. Related:
[Autom](http://myautom.com) is a robot weight-loss coach with big blue eyes.
You lose more weight because you regard it as having a mind.

[Rhombus](https://www.getrhombus.com) is an e-commerce platform for shop to
chat with customers by text message… and also accept payments, within the
conversation. Related: [Twitter’s in-feed Buy Now
button](https://blog.twitter.com/2014/testing-a-way-for-you-to-make-purchases-
on-twitter) which is a game changer if widely rolled out.

One of the problems with text interfaces is text entry. Keyboards suck,
especially on mobile devices. Typing also introduces a discoverability
question: How do you know what words are valid right now, or the right grammar
to use? How do you make complex statements?

In the game [Lifeline](http://time.com/3850243/lifeline-apple-watch/)
(iPhone/Apple Watch) you’re texting an astronaut called Taylor who is marooned
on a moon. It works in real-time… when Taylor hikes to a location an hour
away, you won’t hear from her till she gets there. You text back, but it’s not
free text entry, you only get two options at a time. Works well on the
smartwatch too.

Despite the constrained responses, it still feels conversational. Enough that
the first time I killed Taylor - by freezing to death based on advice I’d
given - well, ooof.

_Lifeline_ was prototyped in [Twine](http://twinery.org), the visual
programming language for writing interactive fiction. See also [Inform
7](http://inform7.com) where the code-behind-the-fiction reads like a book but
every word has its code-meaning too, like casting a spell in a stupid
universe, like talking to a golem.
[e.g.:](http://inform7.com/learn/eg/rota/source_20.html)

The dark doorway is an open door. “The doorway looks ordinary enough, but it’s
so difficult to be sure with the unaided eye.” The dark doorway is scenery.
The dark doorway is not openable. The dark doorway is west of Longwall Street
and east of Turret Roundhouse. The dark doorway is trapped.

Another take on text input:

The web-based game [A Dark Room](http://adarkroom.doublespeakgames.com) (also
[available for iPhone](https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/a-dark-
room/id736683061?mt=8)) is astounding. Half text adventure, half point-and-
click. There’s something about clicking "stoke fire" and the words turning
into a progress bar while the fire burns down… The communication of the
element of time.

[Hangkeys](http://thenextweb.com/apps/2015/06/01/m-o-n-k-e-y/) is a neat hack
– it’s a custom iPhone keyboard that makes it super easy to play Hangman over
SMS, Whatsapp, or other text message services.

[Meet by Sunrise](https://sunrise.am/meet/) is a custom smartphone keyboard
that integrates with your calendar: Instead of typing times and locations, you
tap them instead.

[Matt Galligan imagines tap-able buttons in text
messages:](https://medium.com/@mg/there-s-a-chat-for-that-apple-s-biggest-
platform-opportunity-yet-19d5b1870857) "What if instead of installing an app,
we might instead allow a service to chat with us via iMessage?"

Writing code… [Swift allows emoji for variable
names.](http://www.globalnerdy.com/2014/06/03/swift-fun-fact-1-you-can-use-
emoji-characters-in-variable-constant-function-and-class-names/) There’s
something interesting about this. Variable names like “a” or “theCounter” or
“dimensions” are meaningful… but what about underlying feelings they carry?
The “ii” counter of a tight inner loop always has a zing for me, it’s the
twang of high-tension power lines.

So can emoji carry more meaning, or meaning along a different axis? What could
we use this for – instead of “houseAddress” just have a picture of a house;
instead of saying errorDescription just use [smiling pile of
poo](http://emojipedia.org/pile-of-poo/) emoji.

I was noodling with conversational UIs in 2002, back when AIM was a thing.
[What preoccupied me
then](http://interconnected.org/home/2002/04/23/work_thats_currently) \- and
what interests me most now - is how to make an automated conversation with a
bot not boring, and (more importantly) not shit.

So one of the things I found before: The more the bot acts like a human, the
more it will be treated like a human. And the more that happens, the more
likely the bot will have to say “I don’t know what you mean”… which is lame.

Our guiding light is [The Jack
Principles](http://demos.jellyvisionlab.com/downloads/The_Jack_Principles.pdf)
from the 1995 quiz show video game _You Don’t Know Jack._ In short, how to
direct the conversation so a user will never be in a position to ask a
question the machine can’t answer.

([Tom Armitage collected a link to this and
more](http://berglondon.com/blog/2010/12/10/conversational-ui-a-short-reading-
list/) when he ran a chatbot project at Berg back in 2010.)

Something else surprised me about authoring conversations, something almost
contradictory…

I guess what I’m asking is how does a user have a [theory of
mind](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theory_of_mind) about a bot - a conception
of its stance, intentions, domain of knowledge, etc - and how is that
communicated.

My take [back in the
day](http://interconnected.org/home/2003/02/11/at_the_simplest) was to
organise knowledge into domains, within which a tree structure would be
possible but avoided. To summarise how it worked:

My point, I guess, is that [a new medium needs a new
grammar](https://medium.com/@jkalven/the-house-that-fish-built-1cc10349ae8d)
and conversational UIs are definitely a new medium.

For one – they’re intrinsically social. If I’m chatting with a bot in iMessage
about what movies are on nearby, shouldn’t I be able to turn that into a group
chat with my partner? And does the bot conduct two separate conversations, one
with each of us, or assume we’re both searching for the same movie?

We’ll need app frameworks to help author these bots, and the frameworks will
make assumptions about how conversations work in small groups.

And you know what, we’re _still_ in the PC era, the era of personal computing.
We don’t really know how to use computers in small groups, how to use
interfaces collaboratively.

Another big question for me is what happens when we have _many_ of these bots…

How do traverse multiple knowledge domains, discovering features and adapting
how we speak as we go? Is it going to be like FingertipTV and Cinebot, loosely
coupled domains of differing knowledge and vocabulary? Or more like
[Siri](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siri) where the same voice can tell you
everything from “directions home” to “how long do dogs live” (to pick two
examples that it’s giving me right now).

Maybe it will be like Twitter, where everyone I follow is in a single stream –
but I miss what they’re saying? Or like my apps on my phone, where many apps
have their own activity stream… and they fight so hard to get heard that they
constantly spam my notifications panel?

My head goes somewhere quite speculative,

and that’s text adventures.

Dan’s story, [Text Only](http://www.upsideclown.com/2002_02_07.shtml):

What now? >

_N._

You go North

The batteries on your Discman are almost depleted.

Or Julian Dibbell’s memoire [My Tiny
Life](http://www.juliandibbell.com/mytinylife/tinyspiel.html), a tale of
LambdaMoo, a collaboratively built text environment inhabited by objects,
bots, and people.

There’s a strength in spatialising information – of arranging these bots -
these domains of knowledge and differing patterns of interaction - into a web,
or on a map. Some bots are closer to other bots.

So part of me wonders… what if I saw the activity feed from my smart home all
together in one place, and then when I went _north_ , say, that would be the
activity feed from my social networks. Or instead, in my smart home I’d find
my TV, and inside that we could have a chat about what’s being tivo’d tonight.

I don’t want to be too literal. But maybe we need an architecture to arrange
all these bots and feeds and conversations, etc. And while our experience of
the conversations will vary (we’ll be friends with different bots) the
architecture will be shared: Arbitrary, but shared. A
[cyberspace:](http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/14638-cyberspace-a-consensual-
hallucination-experienced-daily-by-billions-of-legitimate)

A consensual hallucination experienced daily by billions of legitimate
operators … [a] representation of data abstracted from banks of every computer
in the human system.

And don’t throw the past away

You might need it some other rainy day

Dreams can come true again

When everything old is new again

When everything old is new again

I might fall in love with you again

EOM

ps. [More on conversational
UIs.](http://interconnected.org/home/2015/06/28/more_on_conversational_uis)
