# Trying to understand credit

I just visited the bank and had an impromptu tutorial in international trade –
good stuff. Recently they told me they’d lost a payment we were supposed to
receive, and two weeks later it turns out they hadn’t lost it at all. It was a
mess, and I have to admit there was a bit of shouting in the meantime. The
shouting resulted in me being handed up to a more senior “relationship
manager” and this is the chap who ran me through the basics of how banks can
help orchestrate aforementioned international trade. So all’s well that ends
well.

I have models in my head of how things work. In my model of how the business
of BERG works, I model [cash, attention, and
risk.](http://berglondon.com/blog/2011/06/21/week-315/) My model of credit
encompasses things like overdrafts, 30 day payment terms, loans and whatnot,
and my understanding of it comes from two sources: my personal experience of
debt (my advances on pocket money, the slow repayment of my student loan,
credit cards) and macro-economics, on which topic Ray Dalio’s paper [A
Template for Understanding What is Going
on](https://www.bwater.com/ViewDocument.aspx?f=44) is an _astoundingly good_
explanation of the current global credit crisis. Dalio explains:

He frames the credit crisis as a “deleveraging” - a kind of global disarmament
of credit - and the essay is simultaneously illuminating and bleak, bleak
stuff. So I get that.

On the other hand I have very little deep understanding of what my mortgage
means. Is it good or bad to have this credit? What if I rent out my mortgaged
house and rent somewhere else? Too confusing.

_Credit_

I used to understand credit as the swap of risk and cash, i.e. I promise to
pay the bank some cash in the future in order for them to take a risk now. For
example: they front me cash as a loan (or, more informally, an overdraft) and
I pay it back plus some percentage. The fee I pay covers them not having the
money in the meantime, plus the risk they take on me not returning the cash.

After my meeting with the bank I understand credit a little differently.

I now understand credit as transferring _no_ risk. The bank may front me cash
now, but I give them security in the form of my house or something else. I
retain all risk, nothing is transferred. There is no risk to the bank in
issuing the credit. What I’m paying the bank for is access to their
proprietary marketplace to exchange forms of capital - in the case I
mentioned, cash and houses - together with a promise that the exchange won’t
be finalised so long as certain conditions are met. So credit is possible not
because the bank is able to absorb risk, but because:

Yes, the bank does have risk here, but it’s _not_ the same risk as my risk.
It’s new risk.

Interestingly what this leaves available is a system in which risk and cash
_are_ exchanged, where risk _is_ transferred. This is what investment is, and
this is what [Kickstarter](http://www.kickstarter.com/) does.

Anyway this seems obvious now I write it down, but I thought I’d share.

Ultimately where it leads me is to start looking for a relationship between
risk and credit as if they are the same thing but one observed as static in
time and the other in motion, in the same way that magnetism and electricity
are the same thing [separated by the speed of
light.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classical_electromagnetism_and_special_relativity)

_Update:_ On a little reflection, a bank isn’t quite a marketplace because the
transaction types are highly limited. Cash flows in and out, and cash flows
out transacted for security (a promise on other capital). It would be worth
diagramming the systems of banks, individual lending, and investments in order
to see where the thing called credit emerges.
