# Cyborg prosthetics for limbs that don’t exist

If you’re given a third arm coming out of the middle of your chest, a really
long third arm, it turns out you can adapt to using it successfully in less
than 10 minutes.

[Homuncular Flexibility in Virtual
Reality](https://vhil.stanford.edu/mm/2014/won-jcmc-homuncular.pdf), Won et al
(2015) [PDF].

What if you could become a bat–your arms acting as wings allowing you to fly
through the night sky? The avatars that users inhabit in virtual reality (VR)
make this possible. … For example, could people learn to control a lobster
avatar that had many more limbs than its human user? … Tracked movements that
the user made in the physical world would be rendered as different movements
of the avatar body. Thus, an eight-armed lobster could have each limb powered
by the rotation of a wrist, the flex of an ankle, or some combination of the
two.

And:

In Experiment Two, participants controlling three-armed avatars learned to hit
more targets than participants in two-armed avatars.

And in the “Future directions” section:

how far can we push these adaptations? Can people learn to control eight
limbs, or kilometer-long arms?

Okay so that’s VR, but why not really?

[The Cave](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cave_automatic_virtual_environment)
was a proto-VR environment where you would stand in a cube-shaped room where a
virtual environment was projected on the walls. Using a controller, you could
“move” through the virtual environment – and look around you without needing
to use a headset.

I don’t have a reference for this but I heard about this experiment: what they
did was track the rotation of your head, as you looked from side to side, and
then rotate the virtual environment the same amount _again._ So if you looked
90 degrees the right, it would be as though you were looking 180 degrees,
directly behind you.

What I heard was that people adapt surprisingly quickly to this. You get
accustomed, really fast, to being able to rotate your head all the way round
like an owl.

Dani Clode’s design provocation [The Third
Thumb](https://www.daniclodedesign.com/thethirdthumb) visualises a robotic
extra thumb as a sixth digit on the hand, used to hold fruit and play the
guitar.

[MobiLimb](https://marcteyssier.com/projects/mobilimb/) is a robotic finger
that protrudes from a smartphone. It can prop itself up so you can see the
screen; it can literally point things out; it can drag itself across the
table.

Why don’t we see a ton of serious research into areas like this? Given it
turns out we can adapt psychologically quite happily to having extra limbs,
why don’t we see R&D money being _piled in?_

I want to see weird-ass research lab nerds from universities walking around
like [Doctor Octopus](https://www.marvel.com/characters/doctor-octopus-otto-
octavius), doing their best to convince the rest of us that **more hands =
better.** I want to see folks like Apple and Google try _really, really hard_
to get it to go mainstream, even though they will mostly fail.

Because [decades of research got us the
iPhone](https://medium.com/@atlan54/mariana-mazzucato-showed-how-much-
publicly-funded-r-d-was-behind-this-great-invention-the-iphone-bd9e7d83335e) –
and, by extension, the [peace dividend of the smartphone
wars](https://foreignpolicy.com/2013/04/29/epiphanies-from-chris-anderson/)
being: drones (sensors and batteries) and the internet of things (commodity
connectivity) which is massive in the industrial world). Imagine if robotic
prosthetics were cheap and commonplace.

What are the mundane, everyday applications?

[I want an exoskeleton chairless
chair](https://www.micromo.com/applications/robotics-factory-
automation/chairless-chair-system) but for gardening.

I want to open the door of a cafe with my third arm when my hands are full
carrying coffee.

[I want to feel electric fields with my
fingertips.](https://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=5477830) I
want to go ambling in a new city and not get lost because I have [an intuitive
sense of north](https://sensebridge.net/projects/northpaw/). I want a camera
stuck on the back of my neck that shows up as a stretched image round the rim
of my otherwise ordinary glasses, and I want to know how quickly _seeing
behind me_ feels like a little extra sense that I couldn’t do without.

Forget showing my lost items on a map on a screen and making me treasure-hunt
my way back to them. I want to be able to whistle to my phone from anywhere in
the house, and have it wriggle out of the sofa and scamper across the room and
snuggle into my pocket.

Imagine giving your phone a high five with a tiny hand that you don’t yet
have.
