# Rambling thoughts about cyborgs and emotions

Hey so here’s the paper [Cyborgs and
Space](http://movies2.nytimes.com/library/cyber/surf/022697surf-cyborg.html)
(1960) by Clynes and Kline in which **the word cyborg was first introduced.**
It’s short. Here’s the first line:

Space travel challenges mankind not only technologically but also spiritually,
in that it invites man to take an active part in his own biological evolution.

Our geological era, the
[Anthropocene](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anthropocene), in which human
activity is the dominant agent of change in our ecosystems, is pretty fraught.
That line makes me wonder… what if we attempted to find the **spiritual
crisis** in the climate crisis? In that there are questions about morality,
the afterlife (well, in a way… what happens _to others_ after we die), a
reconceptualising of the Prime Mover, shame and guilt and all the rest; sin
and punishment all suddenly up in the air, a new Great Flood. _Any
theologians, please get in touch…_

Anyway, the paper is about adapting to new environments - such as space - and
here’s the line where _“cyborg”_ is introduced:

For the exogenously extended organizational complex functioning as an
integrated homeostatic system unconsciously, we propose the term “Cyborg.” The
Cyborg deliberately incorporates exogenous components extending the self-
regulatory control function of the organism **in order to adapt it to new
environments.**

Which - continuing the earlier thought - makes me realise that we are in a new
environment now, a [climate-changed, pandemic-swept
one](/home/2020/05/06/lockdown), and to adapt, we will become cyborgs - with
our facemasks and our air conditioning, now as vital to our bodies as our hair
and our sweat glands - and the new environment isn’t space, but is right here.

ANYWAY. Not my point.

ALSO NOT MY POINT,

But:

I found that _“Cyborgs and Space”_ paper strangely residing on a NY Times
server. And it appears to be connected to this column, [The Cyborg as Warp-
Speed
Evolution](http://movies2.nytimes.com/library/cyber/surf/022697surf.html) from
1997 by Ashley Dunn, which follows the evolution of the term, "Clynes
continued to develop the concept of the cyborg, coming up with a Cyborg II,
III, IV and V."

Cyborg II involved the manipulation of human emotions through a series of
mental exercises. III involved genetic alterations to enhance the human
emotional range, while IV involved deeper genetic changes and V brought the
separation of mind from body.

So then I found another column by Ashley Dunn called [In a Cyborg World,
Gender Boundaries
Fall](http://movies2.nytimes.com/library/cyber/surf/030597surf.html) about
Donna Harroway’s **Cyborg Manifesto** – and my point in this tangent WHICH IS
ALREADY TOO LONG, SORRY is not about Harroway either, but this:

[Here are Ashley Dunn’s other columns in the NY Times from
1997](http://movies2.nytimes.com/library/cyber/surf/indexsurf-97.html) and it
is AMAZING.

Why don’t we have technology columns in national newspapers today that veer
between finding a replacement for AOL, to the nature of liberty, to webcams,
to cyborgs??

Who the hell is this Ashley Dunn and how do I subscribe to their newsletter 23
years after the fact?

So I was leafing through [The Cyborg
Handbook](https://www.worldcat.org/title/cyborg-handbook/oclc/755078417)
(1995, edited by Chris Hables Grey) which is a collection of essays etc, and
there’s an interview with Clynes in there, and this caught my eye about
**emotions,** and Clynes is talking about _pleasure_ emotions here, which he
says are multi-dimensional, humans having "many many different types of
satisfaction. The pleasure of feeling in love is not commensurate with that of
a hot bath."

So he alights on reverence first: "There is no reason in the world why cyborg
can’t feel reverence as much as any other human."

But then he gets onto _new emotions,_ and the interviewer asks:

I was struck that in several places your book talks about **a new kind of
laughter** you sort of discovered.

(Clynes actually replies that you can’t invent new emotions without radical
change in molecular biology.)

But it’s a galvanising sort of idea isn’t it.

Like, what’s the kind of laughter you get when you watch [that amazing 25
minute Sudoku video](https://kottke.org/20/05/solving-the-the-miracle-sudoku)
(thank you Jason Kottke for sharing this), that vicarious, rapid cascade of
_aha! aha! aha!_

And what’s the emotion that a machine learning function feels while it’s
exploring the [latent space of landscape
paintings](https://twitter.com/videodrome/status/978406962147684352?s=21)?

Thinking about an emotion which can maybe be generally defined as a tropism
towards certain categories of results, a choice of search algorithm/reward
function, a modifier on how learning is done from this experience, a heuristic
learned _from_ experience too, and a bias on resource allocation… I wonder
whether we can identify clusters of these alternate strategies used by
bacteria, viruses, and computer programs, and call these emotions?

And if we, as individual humans, were to make different choices on those axes
because of exposure to more-than-human input, would those be new emotions too?

Whatever. Reading a book, made me think, posted it on my blog, didn’t edit.
See you later.
