# Decision fatigue

**Decision fatigue:** When you make a lot of choices in a short period of
time, you find it harder to exert self-control.

I was in Las Vegas last week, and seeing the women in short skirts serving at
the resort facilities and in the casino bars, remembering also the booth babes
at [CES,](http://gizmodo.com/5875243/fever-dream-of-a-guilt+ridden-gadget-
reporter) it got me thinking why casinos and trade shows bother doing this.
What game are they playing? (You can tell I’m a lot of fun at parties.)

I wonder whether it might be to fatigue the superego. You’re working hard not
to behave in an inappropriate fashion around this show, so your self-control
becomes inhibited in subsequent situations such as whether to place a big bet
or let yourself be guided along a path by a salesperson about a purchase or
checking out a product. “Inappropriate fashion” varies for straight men,
straight women and gay women. Gay men and people who don’t bother censoring
their behaviour would seem to be at an advantage here.

Last thoughts:

People seem to enjoy the large number of choices involved in getting coffee at
Starbucks. Does this warm up your decision muscle every morning? And
television is the epitome of decision-free consumption - one choice every 30+
minutes - so is this why it belongs so neatly in the evening, when decision
fatigue has really kicked in?

Should you ration the decisions you make, [wearing the same clothes every
day](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/29/fashion/men-shop-in-
bulk.html?pagewanted=all) to retain your limited choosy vital fluids for the
major stuff? Or does your choice muscle get pumped over the months: the more
decisions you make, the better you get?

I mentioned the superego just now, [Freud’s concept of the personality’s
guiding sense of right and
wrong.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Id,_ego_and_super-ego#Super-ego) I find
it interesting that decision making and self-control are linked, in that
activity in one will fatigue the other. It would be interesting to explore the
entire space of functions associated with the superego and find - via mutual
fatigue effects - which are, in this functional view, part of the same muscle.
