# My epiphany at the dentist and how I carried it back to reality

I’m just back from the dentist right now, so here’s a story about another time
going to the dentist and an epiphany I had while I was in the chair.

I had a whole bunch of dental work a few years ago.

Three sessions in the chair, each 3 or 4 hours long. My dentist was from Iraq
and he had a sideline representing the new government installed by the Allies
so he would crop up in the media from time to time and occasionally disappear
for a few months to Baghdad to lend a hand. He was also a neurolinguistic
programming adept, so I enjoyed quizzing him about that, and his professional
claim was that he employed hypnosis to take the sting out of dental work,
using a process of visualisation to descend a series of steps into a beautiful
garden of lakes and trees, etc, though actually I think he just had a heavy
hand on the nitrous.

I don’t know if you’ve ever had nitrous oxide but it’s mildly euphoric and
very relaxing. Sensation is reduced and your body feels heavy, floating
somehow. Together with the headphones (the aforementioned hypnosis playing on
a tape) and my eyes closed, I would pretty quickly descend back inside myself,
and spend the hours in a semi-observant, semi-dreaming state.

So that was really the story of the first session, inhabiting this odd kind of
dentist dream, idly exploring my altered mental state, dissociated, yet able
to think and reason.

What I noticed was that my mind felt smaller somehow, like a cat’s brain (I
remember thinking), but also closer to the fabric of reality itself. Without
my preconceptions getting in the way, stripped back to my animal brain, I was
able to perceive more clearly, and therefore had access to deeper truths about
myself and the cosmos – both the same thing really.

And just before I resurfaced, I discovered a huge truth, a startling
revelation.

Not that I could remember it.

All I could recall was its import.

So in the second of my three sessions, I went back to re-discover whatever it
was.

The way I ended up thinking about the nitrous state wasn’t that it wasn’t that
I was reduced, like this simplified mind idea I had, or transcendent even, a
layer above or below my regular mind somehow.

Rather it was as if my mind had rotated about itself into a new configuration
so that all the sensory apparatus was now pointing inwards at itself, the full
power of sense-making lensed inward, and by looking into my own mind and
contemplating its form, I could then make deductions from its shape about the
nature of the cosmos outside.

What’s more, I was able to maintain ideas and follow trains of thought, in
this configuration, that wouldn’t be possible or sustainable in the other,
regular configuration, the configuration of mundane reality. Both states were
valid, independently, but they couldn’t exist simultaneously.

But what was interesting was that there was an isomorphism between ideas in
the two configurations. So while I was able to run _impossible chains of
thought_ in the nitrous configuration that I couldn’t run in the regular
configuration, the _destination concepts_ that I reached _could_ be
transferred between configurations.

That was why it was possible to reach some kind of epiphany. In mundane
reality, such a concept would be inaccessible. By in the altered
configuration, I could reach this new idea, and then, having reached it, bring
it back.

My mental model for this was two worlds, two bubbles, linked with a tunnel.

One bubble, large, outward facing and well-lit: the regular configuration of
mundane reality. The second bubble, dark, inward facing, contemplative,
possibly small but possibly infinite: the altered nitrous configuration. I
inhabit either one configuration or the other. Between them, a narrow tunnel,
along which my consciousness moves as it transforms from one to the other.

Did I re-discover the revelation? _Yes._ I know that I did. I know that it was
important. Did I remember what it was?

That second session, no, I did not.

When I came out of the dentist, all I could remember was the image of these
two bubbles for the two psychic configurations, and the tunnel.

And mainly, this idea: _you can bring one thing through the tunnel._

What I had figured out was that when my mind moved between the configurations,
what I thought was urgent and desirable in one configuration wouldn’t
necessarily translate to the other.

In particular, what felt like a rare revelation about the nature of self and
the cosmos, etc, _from the perspective of the regular configuration_ was, yes,
important when viewed from the nitrous configuration, but actually it felt
pretty natural and commonsensical there too, and so, in that altered state, I
felt no necessity to work hard to remember it.

But what I also figured out what that, as I moved between these two worlds, if
I concentrated on holding one thought in mind, I could deliberately carry it
through the tunnel and it would be the seed for my thoughts on the other side.

So what I decided to do, ahead of the third session in the dentist chair, was
to carry this vow with me:

When I encountered the revelation, I must carry it back, no matter what.

I would entered the altered state configuration, and hand this vow to altered
state me.

It didn’t work entirely as planned.

The third session began. They gave me the gas, I went through the tunnel
repeating to myself this vow to re-discover the big truth and bring it back, I
entered the altered state, and so on, and as before I had this same revelation

- this _epiphany_ \- but this time I also remembered my goal to bring it back
  with me to the surface.

But while the plan was to carry it through the tunnel, back to everyday
reality, I realised that this idea, discovered in the alternate configuration,
was too large to come back with me that way.

Instead the only way was to burst between the realms of consciousness by force
and bring the new truth into the light via a new route.

Which is what I did, and it must have been disconcerting to see.

My mouth was being held open. There were a lot of broken teeth at that point,
it was right in the middle, and they were cutting back my gums too, so there
was a fair amount of blood I believe, and a couple of suction tubes in my
mouth.

Coming up was like swimming hard towards the sun from deep under the ocean,
and breaking the through the water’s surface took huge effort.

Forcing my eyes open was a slow battle.

Eventually I triumphed, and the dentist and two nurses in the room were there
as I managed to open my eyes, halfway through that day’s procedure, and
gestured that I needed to speak – I remember knowing that was my chance to
vocalise and concretise my epiphany before it evaporated in the light. So they
took the tubes out of my mouth and the clamps off my lips, and moved the
equipment away, and pulled the cotton wool out, and all of that stuff, and
gestured to let me know I could speak, and listened as I was able to get out
the words that had taken me 10 hours over three weeks of deep internal
exploration, and strategic planning let’s not forget, to bring back from the
depths of altered psychic states to our everyday reality; and I said these
words, and no words will ever be truer than the truth contained in these words
at that moment, and I said this: Can I Have More Nitrous Please.

And they laughed and nodded and turned the nitrous oxide up, and put the tubes
back in my mouth, and I closed my eyes, and they carried on with their work,
and I lay there happy.

I guess the lesson is that what is vitally important in one state of mind is
not necessarily vital or important in another.

Truth is contextual?

Something like that.

Nitrous is great? Or at least it was at that particular time for that
particular me. That’s another lesson I suppose.

They offered me nitrous today and I declined. Instead I was amazed when they
scanned my teeth with a handheld scanner that automatically stitched the
images into a 3D model, and even more amazed that it took only 7 minutes to
print the new crown. Colouring and firing the crown took 15 minutes. I was in
and out in an hour and a half, including having the old crown knocked out,
[watching the dentist adjust the 3D
geometry](https://www.instagram.com/p/CHNzvZypsJn/) on the big screen next to
the chair, and having a nice chat about photogrammetry and also the history of
milling machines. So there we go.
