# A description of metabolism

This is the most straightforward description of metabolism I’ve read. I’m just
going to quote it all. I look at what I might highlight, and there’s not a
wasted word.

One property of living things above all makes them seem almost miraculously
different from nonliving matter: they create and maintain order, in a universe
that is tending always to greater disorder. To create this order, the cells in
a living organism must perform a never-ending stream of chemical reactions. In
some of these reactions, small organic molecules–amino acids, sugars,
nucleotides, and lipids–are being taken apart or modified to supply the many
other small molecules that the cell requires. In other reactions, these small
molecules are being used to construct an enormously diverse range of proteins,
nucleic acids, and other macromolecules that endow living systems with all of
their most distinctive properties. Each cell can be viewed as a tiny chemical
factory, performing many millions of reactions every second.

The chemical reactions that a cell carries out would normally occur only at
temperatures that are much higher than those existing inside cells. For this
reason, each reaction requires a specific boost in chemical reactivity. This
requirement is crucial, because it allows each reaction to be controlled by
the cell. The control is exerted through the specialized proteins called
enzymes, each of which accelerates, or catalyzes, just one of the many
possible kinds of reactions that a particular molecule might undergo. Enzyme-
catalyzed reactions are usually connected in series, so that the product of
one reaction becomes the starting material, or substrate, for the next. These
long linear reaction pathways are in turn linked to one another, forming a
maze of interconnected reactions that enable the cell to survive, grow, and
reproduce.

Two opposing streams of chemical reactions occur in cells: (1) the catabolic
pathways break down foodstuffs into smaller molecules, thereby generating both
a useful form of energy for the cell and some of the small molecules that the
cell needs as building blocks, and (2) the anabolic, or biosynthetic, pathways
use the energy harnessed by catabolism to drive the synthesis of the many
other molecules that form the cell. Together these two sets of reactions
constitute the metabolism of the cell.

_From the chapter[Catalysis and the Use of Energy by
Cells](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK26838/) in Molecular Biology of
the Cell. 4th edition._
