# A list of seven different jobs, all called designer

Back in 2009, I wrote down all the different ways I heard “designer” used as a
job title. There were seven types.

I just went digging through my notes, having half remembered it this
afternoon. Here’s the list.

In my notes I’ve also got a reference to the “big-D Designer,” the person who
is the holder of the vision, and often uses all the other types (and other job
roles besides) to bring that vision about. I think the big-D Designer can fit
into any of the above roles; it’s dependent on the person and the context.

The purpose of this list was to understand confusion. If you told someone else
you were a designer, what else could they believe that you meant?

This isn’t meant to be a typology with hard edges. It was a list made from
observation.

Since I made the list in 2009, twelve years ago:

So I don’t know what these trends have done to my list. There are a lot of
roles that I would say are design-adjacent, that once could have functionally
been performed by a designer, but they have many paths in and are increasingly
their own distinct roles. I’m thinking of roles like product marketing, and
interface copy.

Does the list still hold up in 2021?

Are there any new ways that designer is used in job titles?

I’ll also make a distinction between designer-as-job-title and designer-as-
vocation.

Designers who have been to design college have become part of the culture of
design. They have visceral understanding of method (the brief, the material,
the crit), and training (which gives not just technique but a particular
perspective), but also a connection to design as a historical conversation,
which combined means that the designer can go on and be an author or a racing
car driver, but they will always be a designer.

Whereas I have (back in the day) co-founded a design studio, but haven’t been
to design school, so while I could inhabit a “designer” job role, in the same
way I could inhabit other job roles, I would never be a designer in the
vocational sense.

I think.

This archeology of my notes prompted by reading [Org Design for Design
Orgs](https://orgdesignfordesignorgs.com) (2016) by Peter Merholz and Kristin
Skinner, which I’m reading as a chaser to [Inspired: How to Create Tech
Products Customers Love](https://svpg.com/inspired-how-to-create-products-
customers-love/) (2018) by Marty Cagen.

_Inspired_ is a fantastic handbook to the product role in tech companies from
startups to behemoths like Google. _(Thanks[Sippey](https://sippey.medium.com)
for the recommendation.)_ It’s basically a giant outline of the product role,
hugely practical, with minimal extraneous words, from a place of deep
experience – high signal/noise ratio. My favourite kind of business book.

I’m reading around the topic of design leadership, in its broadest sense, in
tech companies, so any recommendations of companion reads to _Org Design for
Design Orgs_ (which I’m greatly enjoying) will be gratefully received.
