# Viscerally and deliberately unsettling product design

I’m picking up on a trend of viscerally unsettling product design. My guess is
that it’s scouting ahead of the coming wave of robotics.

Examples!

_(That last one via the[SoftRobotCritics
tumblr](https://softrobotcritics.tumblr.com) which is excellent for tracking
this world.)_

I have to say, I enjoy this sense of discomfort. Absolutely some products
should make me feel queasy. My smartphone feels all too smooth and familiar in
my hand when I’m indulging in something societally toxic, such as scrolling
Facebook, and a soft fabric smart speaker in my home is at odds with the fact
that it’s an open mic connected to the cloud. At least when I’m refuelling my
car, I have to suffer the unpleasant fumes.

It’s necessary and timely to explore naturalness and physicality, and to map
the boundary with creepiness, because we’ll clearly have more and more robots
in coming years – and the approach right now is either self-driving plastic
boxes, or biomimicry, whether that’s robot arms or [dancing dogs and humans
with backpacks](https://www.theverge.com/tldr/2020/12/29/22205055/boston-
dynamics-robots-spot-atlas-handle-dancing-video). Maybe there are
opportunities in escaping the obvious archetypes.

So pornographic lamps are not just about tapping into the absurd. It could be
that these designs are a systemic probes of the [Uncanny
Valley](https://spectrum.ieee.org/automaton/robotics/humanoids/the-uncanny-
valley) _(that’s a translation of Masahiro Mori’s original essay)_ – and if we
see it that way, what else is there to investigate?

I would usually ask for pointers to more examples, but I’m not sure that’s a
smart idea.

In the meantime:

Perhaps we should expect this nascent trend to come into the mainstream and
also into the home, just as the original Bondi blue iMac triggered a wave of
translucent blue plastic in all categories of product.
[Existenz](http://cronenbergmuseum.tiff.net/collaborateurs_15-collaborators_15-eng.html)-style
dishwashers.
[Giger](https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/nov/02/hr-giger-
psychedelic-art-alien) lightswitches – which may have some advantages over a
standard binary switch in terms of the degrees of control, as you would be
able to control both the brightness and hue simultaneously simply by inserting
your finger into the wall-mounted orifice.
