# Sometimes the product innovation is the distribution

Did you know that Moleskine notebooks have their own ISBN?

I used to run a bookshop in a tweeting vending machine called [Machine
Supply](https://www.actsnotfacts.com/made/machine-supply). It was the smallest
member of the _Booksellers Association_ (I had a sticker on the glass and
everything) and I partnered with a great book wholesaler.

So the book business relies on wholesalers. They buy the books from the
publishers and bookshops buy the books from them. They provide warehousing and
distribution for the publishers… but critically for the bookshops they provide
a trade account. Credit! The ability to return stock! Ordering systems and
consolidated invoices and regular shipping! A big deal.

It all relies on ISBNs.

One day I discovered Moleskine notebooks in the book catalogue.

They had an ISBN, which meant they would fit into _my_ vending machine
automation too. (I built a bunch of custom software.)

I ordered some… standard wholesale discount. They arrived along with the
regular books. I stocked them in the vending machine. (They fitted the shelf
mechanism of course.) They sold well!

Would I have stocked Moleskines if they weren’t distributed by the book
wholesaler? No, it wouldn’t have been worth the hassle.

It’s such a clever hack.

Moleskines are notebooks. Not real books.

But they’re book _shaped._ By which I mean the margin is approximately the
same, and they can be warehoused just the same, and they can be sold on the
counter of the exact same stores.

The publication date of _“Moleskine Pocket Hardcover Ruled Notebook Black”_
(ISBN 9788883701009) is March 2003.

Moleskine the company was only founded in 1997.

I remember them being _everywhere_ in the early 2000s.

This ISBN hack, early in their history, will have been part of why.

Every so often I see another product which is shaped like a book but clearly
_not_ a book, yet has an ISBN, and I’m like: aha.

[Psychobox](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Psychobox-Box-Psychological-
Games/dp/1590301706) _(Amazon)_ from 2004 comes to mind: it’s a box of optical
illusions and tricks, plus a short pamphlet.

It’s packaged to fit on a bookshelf! It has an ISBN! It is reaching a whole
set of customers it would never have normally reached!

There are fewer indie bookstores than there used to be. This was a really
clever approach for a time.

_Music._

Back in the day I remember hearing about one of the big music publishers – EMI
maybe?

This was during the transition from CDs to MP3s. No streaming yet, and people
would still buy CDs to rip them.

We’d call this a drop nowadays: they’d just dropped a new album.

They were selling it as a USB memory stick on a lanyard in JD Sports, a major
high street sport and lifestyle chain.

And that was _so smart._

USB memory sticks were in demand at the time, you always needed a few.

MP3 piracy was a big problem and free of course, but inconvenient.

So to put the digital files conveniently and visibly in a place where your
audience is going to be anyway! Clever distribution play.

Often when we think about product innovation we start with: how have customer
needs changed? Or, how has technology changed? And we look for opportunities
to change the product.

But instead we can ask: where do our customers congregate? Can we find a novel
way to distribute our product so it reaches our customers there?

Or you can even start with distribution, ahead of the final form of the
product:

Where are there busy markets with well-established distribution channels and
potential partners? How can we hijack that distribution to do something
interesting?

**Designers, this part is for you.**

By coincidence I’ve had three? maybe four? conversations with designers and
independent studios, just over the last couple weeks, where they have some
side-project product they want to sell, or have tried and not quite found the
way.

And when we’re chatting, I can see that it’s because go-to-market is an opaque
process, or that the product would suddenly become much more interesting or
tractable with a market tweak or distribution twist.

That’s why distribution is on my mind.

I would love for more design studios to be bringing their own products to
market.

So, open offer: if you’re a design studio bumping up against how to
commercialise something alongside your client work, especially friends with
studios here in London and the UK, I’m happy to chat, share what I know, and
be a sounding board. Drop me a note.
