# Dolls’ houses and demo modes

In a roundabout way, because of dolls’ houses, I’ve been thinking about
special modes in software to let you learn by playing and teach by showing.

The 17th century dolls’ houses are found in the Riksmuseum in Amsterdam just
around the corner from the Vermeers and the Rembrandts (including his _Night
Watch,_ [freshly extended by 2 feet using
AI](https://kottke.org/21/06/a-rembrandt-masterpiece-uncropped-by-ai)).

Here they are: [They’re
beautiful.](https://www.rijksmuseum.nl/en/rijksstudio/works-of-art/dolls-
houses) I stay so long to look whenever I’ve been. They’re models of real
houses, and "not toys; they were a hobby, the equivalent for women of the
collection cabinets kept by men."

One particular dolls’ house, collected by Petronella Oortman, has furniture
made using the same materials as the regular sized versions: "Her dolls’ house
cost as much as an actual house on a canal!"

So these are objects of art, meant to convey taste and wealth.

I heard somewhere (I can’t remember where) that the models were meant to be
closed up and carried with you when you travelled. An effective way to show
off your domestic style to your friends in the days before photographs.

A dollhouse nowadays is often a toy. Often exquisite, yes, but primarily a
canvas for the imagination, mostly for kids, a place for fantasies and stories
and play. The dollhouse-as-art still exists, but it’s not what I think of
first.

There is a _third_ type of dollhouse, historically, as this article in _The
Atlantic_ says: **simulation.**

Beginning in the 17th century, “Nuremberg kitchens” might contain a hearth,
cooking pots, a straw broom. These all-metal houses were designed without
ornament, for purely utilitarian purposes. Used as teaching tools for girls,
Nuremberg kitchens allowed mothers to show daughters how to set up and control
a house. All about learning rules, a Nuremberg kitchen was the opposite of a
dollhouse as a dream world of fantasy. It was a place where girls learned to
manage not only the objects of the house but also its servants, where girls
would learn to become the lady of the house.

Homes are complex organisms! I can imagine seeing the flows of goods into the
kitchen, where the butler sleeps, what happens below stairs when you ring the
service bell; how the clockwork hangs together.

What a wonder to have a demo version to play with before running your own for
real.

The original
[SimCity](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SimCity_(1989_video_game)>) game
(1989) hit these same three notes:

ASIDE: TWO LINKS:

Imagine if Twitter had a simulation mode.

Social media is already a place to socialise and tell stories. The sites are
mere backdrops.

MySpace showed that these social spaces should _also_ allow for customisation,
construction, and skill. It’s a crying shame that Twitter and Facebook don’t
do likewise. I would love to decorate my profile with images, FAQs, links to
my favourite communities and so on (others would share music and creations).
This is a common lament when you get a bunch of old school social software
nerds together.

But training?

What would a “Nuremberg kitchen” version of Twitter look like?

What if every social network also had a single-player “learn how this works”
mode. All the accounts would be deepfakes with machine-made faces, all the
posts procedurally generated. When you posted, you would get realistic
responses. It could teach you, by use and example, how to identify fake news
or pile-ons or toxic content. You could experiment yourself in a safe sandbox
where everything is thrown away at the end of the session and invisible to the
outside world.

By letting you act out and take things to extremes, would you develop a better
intuition about what’s worth taking seriously on Twitter… and what’s not?

Back when I was building **Job Garden** _(which is sadly no longer),_ one of
the first features I built was DEMO MODE.

Here’s the write-up: [All products should have a demo mode (Week
9).](https://link.medium.com/YElxVs8HRhb)

It was an admin-only feature in the top nav that let me quickly construct job
boards and navigate them in different ways. I found it invaluable to

My favourite Demo Mode feature was “share.” It worked like this:

If at any point in the demo I created a configuration that the person I was
talking to liked the look of, I could hit the _Share_ button and it would
generate a code I could email to them, or even write down on a bit of paper.
Using that code would lead them through the account setup process and then
transfer the configuration they had seen into their new account. It was the
most effective onboarding technique I found.

I’d like a button on Google Sheets that put my work into a mode where I could
experiment wildly and without fear that any of my saves might be overwritten.

I’d like a button, when I get a new hire car, that lets me play with the
steering wheel and all the buttons and sticks, and lets me get a feel of the
weight of the pedals and the heft of the gears, but without it ever moving
anywhere.

I’d like an iPhone mode where I can show somebody how to change settings and
sort photos and send messages, and let them play around with all the switches
to see what they do, reassured that when the mode closes, no changes will be
retained, and nothing actually sent.

I’d like a model of my home to try out solar on the roof, or Airbnb over the
summer, or a different kind of budget. [A house is a machine for living
in](https://99percentinvisible.org/article/machines-living-le-cobusiers-
pivotal-five-points-architecture/) and I’d like to better learn the levers.

So I wonder about single-player sandboxes, simulations, demo modes, and
teaching tools. They all feel of a kind.

And they all feel like something that dolls’ houses got right and modern
technology, so far, has not.
