# On speaking with dolphins

I just read _Extraterrestrial Languages_ by Daniel Oberhaus and a comment
about dolphins made me blink.

In 1961, a group of 10 scientists met to discuss communication with aliens.
The conference

From the book:

Lilly gained widespread recognition for his work through the publications of
_Man and Dolphin,_ in which he argued that dolphins may be as intelligent as
humans and that communicating with them should be possible. Lilly ended up
going to great lengths to speak to dolphins, including the questionable
practice of **injecting his cetacean subjects with LSD,** but his attempts at
interspecies communication were never successful.

This Guardian piece has more about Lilly’s work:

_Man and Dolphin_ extrapolated Mary Lilly’s initial observations of dolphins
mimicking human voices, right through to teaching them to speak English and on
ultimately to a Cetacean Chair at the United Nations, where all marine mammals
would have an enlightening input into world affairs, widening our perspectives
on everything from science to history, economics and current affairs.

The above article focuses on the Lilly’s assistant, a young woman, and the
distinctly unethical goings-on in the lab.

It sounds like the human/dolphin sexual encounters garnered some media
attention, and - on top of Lilly’s already unusual work, and the connection
with aliens - dolphin communication made its way into public consciousness.

Honestly I don’t know how I’ve missed John Lilly’s work.

It must have made a big impression. There’s often a throwaway comment in sci-
fi of a certain era about a dolphin ambassador, or a “background colour”
mention about a breakthrough in speaking with cetaceans. Of course this is the
kind of thing that I recall reading but is impossible to google, so I’m
looking over my bookshelf wondering what to pick up.

In Suzette Haden Elgin’s feminist/linguistics/science fiction novel [Native
Tongue](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Native_Tongue_(Elgin_novel)>) _(1984),_
which I’m now re-reading, one storyline includes language learning facilities
(the “Interface”) clearly inspired by Lilly’s lab, and also the use of LSD.

_The Embedding_ by Ian Watson (1973; here’s [a long
review](https://tenser.typepad.com/tenser_said_the_tensor/2006/04/the_embedding_b.html))

- which is excellent - is also filed on my shelves under: science fiction;
  linguistics; unethically dosing children with psychedelics. I can’t remember
  if dolphins feature, but I think I might read this one next.

Okay so let’s pretend we _could_ speak with dolphins. What would that mean?

I mean, not everyone would be able to speak with dolphins. I imagine that, to
me personally, speaking with a dolphin would not be particularly accessible.
So all I would hear would be through magazine interviews, or TV, or reddit
[Ask Me Anythings](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R/IAmA). It would be about as
distant as an interview with Elon Musk.

There would be a particular lobby that would want the dolphins to speak for
the oceans, and there would be an environmental protection agenda. Would that
make a difference? Knowing that there are (human) tribes in the Amazon doesn’t
stop us from cutting it down.

But is that what the dolphins would say? Maybe they would want to share
information about where to go for the best fish. Or make us laugh with dirty
bubble limericks.

I think that, without anything to trade, we’d run out of things to talk about.
Without necessarily supporting a _human_ agenda, what they said wouldn’t be
reported. We’d forget that we could speak with dolphins at all.

By analogy: there are people who have extreme empathy with cows, but we don’t
ask them about cattle farming. To them, cows can speak. See [this paper about
Temple Grandin and cattle empathy](https://ro.uow.edu.au/asj/vol3/iss1/3/):
"Grandin’s biographies credit her autism with providing privileged access to
bovine subjectivity" … but do we, as a culture, pro-actively seek out oracles
like this, and consult them about beefburgers? Maybe we should. Maybe we
shouldn’t. But we don’t.

Anyway.
