# From Zoom Rooms to doorways on my desktop

Zoom Rooms are called rooms but they don’t feel like rooms. I’ll tell you what
does.

I was speaking at [Tweakers Developer
Summit](https://tweakers.net/partners/devsummit/) a couple weeks back – three
talks on consecutive evenings. (Probably overambitious, and I was _exhausted_
but there’s something that intrigues me about this experimental format, which
I why I tried it, and I learnt a bunch. It worked! New narrative possibilities
abound!)

Let me lay out the facts of the speaker experience first:

What made this feel like a room vs dialling-in? Here’s what:

One other feature I liked: I was able to communicate **both information and
energy** simultaneously. Virtual events are hard because the speaker’s face
carries _so much_ emotional energy, and it’s often relegated to a tiny box.
But you also need slides to riff off and give attendees an anchor. The non-
traditional layout of this platform (my face in a tall but narrow window,
portrait style, next to the slides) really worked. (I’ve talked about the
[interplay of slides and speaker
before](/home/2020/07/31/more_video_experiments) (7 July 2020).)

Kudos to the underlying events platform, [Let’s Get
Digital](https://letsgetdigital.com/en/), for some thoughtful design choices
that made a difference.

So we could extend these ideas to video call software…

Could Zoom Rooms be persistent and customisable? What if I could set
background wallpaper, and hook up a Dropbox folder to appear in an interactive
panel? What if we could all do that together?

Could Zoom pay more attention to thresholds? Like, could the “waiting for the
organiser to start this call” screen be a place to gather, somehow? Could it
include a mirror to check my hair, or a transcript of the _last_ call to get
up to speed?

BUT

I’m more interested in leapfrogging to something else: the OS.

Social features should be part of the operating system.

_(Here’s where I wrote about this before:[Multiplayer docs, webcam fashion,
noisy icons: three ideas](/home/2020/11/20/social_os) (20 Nov 2020).)_

In this case, I’m imagining that each video chat room is a window, just like a
filesystem directory window. I can drag and drop documents into it, and they
are immediately shared with the participants.

Of course if I drag and drop a person out of the video chat window onto
another document, that document would immediately become shared. Give it a
special border to distinguish it. We can both edit it; both of our cursors are
visible.

Each room has an icon on my desktop (or I can file them away). Double click
the icon, and it opens the meeting right away.

Now I’m inspired by the 1981 Xerox Star, the highly influential early
“desktop” user interface. I’m especially taken with the way the _printer_
appeared as an icon on the desktop, as this lengthy retrospective explains:

In Star, printing is invoked via the **Copy** command: users simply copy
whatever they want to print to a printer icon. No **Print** command is needed.
Similarly, the function **Send Mail** is handled via **Move** : by moving a
document to the Out-basket.

Let’s do the same and have the meeting room icon double as the anteroom. As
people join the call, I can see their tiny avatars appearing over the icon. If
I long press or hover my cursor over the icon – ambient noise, the muffled
hubbub of people waiting. Perhaps they should even be able to knock. A doorway
on my desktop.

So a challenge to Microsoft, Apple, Google: what are the OS-level hooks
required for third parties like Zoom (and even web-based services) to
integrate like this?
