# Dowsing is a technology for intuition amplification

I’d love to build intuition amplifiers as cyborg prostheses.

Like, here’s an old one: flipping a coin.

You know when you don’t know the right course of action so you get a coin and
then it lands heads and you think, _oh I wish that had been tails._ In the
process some internal signal too faint to discern has been lifted to
awareness.

Like, here’s another: dowsing.

_(Dowsing as the ancient art of walking over a field holding a Y-shaped twig
or stick - the divining rod - and when the stick rises up then you know that
there is water underground. Some people are better dowsers than others.)_

Dowsing is pseudoscience, and whether or not it actually works, I believe in
the _idea_ of dowsing because I can imagine a plausible mechanism. Being this:

So my unfounded, imagined mechanism starts like this: thinking about water,
and stepping into a location where there is increased water likelihood, one
may become primed to look down, which is physically represented as a
microscopic movement or twitch of the fingers. (Which could of course be a
random twitch because that happens too.)

The next step is that the twig is a lever that magnifies the movement, being
gripped right at the end, and you _see_ the far tip of the divining rod move,
then your brain (still unconsciously) either corrects (removes) or accepts
this movement by adjusting your hands.

And so, when there is an unconscious belief that there is water underground,
you enter a positive feedback cycle and the intuition is amplified into a
visible signal.

Equals dowsing.

It’s like the coin flipping but much accelerated and realtime.

So how about _new_ intuition amplifiers?

Now, conversation often serves to pick out and boost intuitions. And [writing
can be a conversation with yourself.](/home/2022/10/12/filtered)

But dowsing is interesting because it’s pre-verbal. It short-circuits the
rationalising and linearising processes inherent in speech.

Dowsing has these three qualities:

(Stochastic resonance is the phenomenon in which random noise can amplify a
signal, like putting static over a photograph too faint to be seen can make it
visible, and [human perception already makes good use of
this](/home/2020/12/15/omens). In short, the noise in the signal from the
unconscious via the stick is a _benefit._)

I think the physical world is intrinsic in these qualities. Our new sensor has
to be embodied; you need to have an actual device.

_Prosthetics._

Remembering that financial traders "are better able to estimate their own
heartbeat than the general population" and this ability is a predictor of
their profitability ([discussed here](/home/2022/07/27/filtered)) – could we
build a wristband to do this?

Say: an Apple Watch that generally taps your wrist, exactly in time with your
own heartbeat.

Would that ability to always be able to tune into your own pulse give us all a
better sense of risk? Whether trading stocks or walking down a street at
night.

Or:

Brain waves. Could a targeted EEG sensor listen to the exact spot on your
cortex which recognises faces – or, better, the mirror neurons that fire when
you recognise someone else’s emotions? My assumption is that we’re all much
better at reading feelings than we think we are. Can we dowse for emotions?

Imagine wearing augmented reality glasses that overlay your conversational
partner with a little bar chart displaying the positive/negative emotions that
your mirror neurons _think_ that you’re seeing. Would that be enough of a
feedback loop to turn you into a cyborg empath?
