# From the other side of the bridge (Milan, April 2024)

_I spoke on 18 April at[UNFOLD](https://www.domusacademy.com/news/unfold-at-
milan-design-week-2024/), an event hosted by Domus Academy in Milan as part of
this year’s Design Week. Students from 6 international design schools
presented their work over the day with an accompanying exhibition, and I was
honoured to open the event. **I chose to speak about dreams.** This is an
essay version of my talk, adapted for this blog._

_[Here’s a list of my upcoming and recent speaking
gigs.](https://www.actsnotfacts.com/made/speaking) I just put together this
list. My first ever gig was in February 2004 which is frankly ludicrous._

I want to pull on a thread about dreams, and AI hallucinations, and - well -
public policy I guess?

There’s the story of the black replica MA-1 flight jacket made by Japanese
fashion brand Buzz Rickson’s. It featured in _Pattern Recognition_ (2003) by
William Gibson.

It didn’t exist, the jacket. It hadn’t been made. So then Buzz Rickson’s
produced it, in response to people contacting them about it. "An object from
the other side of the bridge," Gibson said. [As previously
discussed.](/home/2020/06/12/gibson)

The structure of DNA came in a dream.

The structure of benzene came in a dream.

In 1943 the [M9 Gun Director](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M9_Gun_Director)
was a breakthrough in anti-aircraft artillery, compensating for target motion,
wind, rotating of the Earth and so on. It inaugurated real-time computing, and
human-machine symbiosis, and inspired Norbert Wiener to conceive of
cybernetics, that trading space of ideas that led to the modern computer and -
for better and worse - today’s technology landscape.

The M9 was invented by engineer David Bigelow Parkinson. It came to him in a
dream.

Then there’s Vannevar Bush’s 1945 article _As We May Think,_ [also previously
discussed](/home/2021/05/14/1945), published in _The Atlantic._ The central
character of the essay was a non-existence device called the Memex: a design
fiction! It became real in the form of the PC and Wikipedia too. Objects from
the other side of the bridge.

So dreams and fiction have power.

Another kind of dream.

That breakthrough AI image generator by Google back in 2015… [remember those
squirrels made out of puppy
faces?](https://www.atlasobscura.com/articles/this-mystery-photo-haunting-
reddit-appears-to-be-image-recognition-gone-very-weird) It blew our minds back
then, [me included](/home/2015/06/19/filtered). The software was called Deep
Dream.

We use the word _“hallucination”_ a lot when we talk about AI today but
usually in a pejorative way.

True, hallucinations have downsides: [ChatGPT is making up fake Guardian
articles](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2023/apr/06/ai-chatgpt-
guardian-technology-risks-fake-article) (2023).

Yet I built an iPhone app that points to the centre of the galaxy using that
very same ChatGPT, hallucinations and all. [Here’s how I built
it.](/home/2024/02/15/galactic-compass)

[Here’s some of the press for Galactic
Compass.](https://www.actsnotfacts.com/made/galactic-compass)

Some mornings I wake up to emails from people in a really tough spot in their
lives _(I’ll quote anonymously):_

It soothes me to check your compass several times a day and rest assured that
the galaxy keeps spinning, it will after my father passes, it will after I
pass, and if life is such a heap of nothingness, it’s up for us to decide what
to do with our remaining time and to pick our direction as best as we can,
irrespective of what any compass may point to.

From hallucinations!

I get dumb ideas in my head a whole bunch.

I couldn’t build this one on my own. I tried for a couple years and couldn’t
quite persuade anyone to help me. They were into it, sure, but - rightly! - it
wasn’t anyone’s priority but mine.

You know, just as [fish are swum by slipping between flowing
vortices](/home/2022/03/02/wheels), I can slip-hop-skip off the hallucinations
of AI. And I brought this app back from the other side of the bridge.

We may damn AI because of hallucinations but it’s accelerating us into a world
that seems directly out of fiction:

Back to dreaming!

That last one closes an interesting loop. Scientists already figured out two-
way communication with individuals in lucid dreams: [Real-time dialogue
between experimenters and dreamers during REM
sleep](https://www.cell.com/current-
biology/fulltext/S0960-9822%2821%2900059-2) (The Cell, 2021).

Look:

AI is a general purpose accelerant. Accelerating the weird, amazing future.
I’m enjoying it. But capitalism too.

_(The idea that our current era is “late capitalism” is an optimistic one, I
always say. What if we’re only halfway through?)_

If the lucid dreaming headband works as promised, which I doubt to be honest
but let’s go with it, we may use it to live out fantasies in a wetware
metaverse, sure, but I would be unsurprised [if where I end up
is](/home/2023/10/13/filtered) "running Microsoft Excel Hypnogogic Edition on
my colonised unconscious, grinding out a second job between midnight and 4am."

That’s my point.

William Gibson’s black replica MA-1 flight jacket _compelled_ people to make
it real.

The compelling dreams around AI are… well, I’d like us all to work harder
around that.

For instance.

“AI is taking our jobs.”

Why _that_ fear, in particular?

If there had been some promising technology that might “take our jobs” in the
era that _The Jetsons_ was broadcast, we’d probably have seen it as leading us
to a life of leisure.

So why don’t we hear _that_ from our politicians?

Why doesn’t the leader of the Labour party stand up and say:

_Let’s have a three day weekend. The two day weekend has been generally
available[only since 1878](https://www.etymonline.com/word/weekend). It was
the dividend of the Industrial Revolution. That was 150 years ago. We won’t be
able to reduce the working week by a whole day over the next electoral period,
it’s not a 4 year project. It’s a 30 year project. It’ll be our North Star for
a generation. But we’ll get there. Let’s make the dividend of technology
increased leisure for all of us, instead of racing to achieve the world’s
first trillionaire._

[Yes I’ve suggested this before](/home/2021/09/30/jobs).

A failure of our collective dreams.

Instead the “compensation” for the loss of jobs is to pay people off:
Universal Basic Income.

But being given simply the ability to consume is an impoverished life.

[From Tools for Conviviality](/home/2011/03/03/conviviality) by Ivan Illich:

People need not only to obtain things, they need above all _the freedom to
make things among which they can live_ , to give shape to them according to
their own tastes, and to put them to use in caring for and about others.

We are within touching distance of this vision!

Look at my new-found ability to build an app, the Galactic Compass I mentioned
earlier: it’s the amazing gift of AI, that the gains are disproportionately
felt by people with skills in the _bottom half of the bell curve_
([source](https://www.oneusefulthing.org/p/centaurs-and-cyborgs-on-the-
jagged)). I am now proudly midwit everything! A joy.

So rather than Universal Basic Income we should pursue _Universal Basic
Agency._

It’s AI so-called hallucinations that will get us there.

Framing can be powerful.

A dream can be a hyperstition.

Hyperstitions "bring about their own reality" – [that’s Nick
Land](https://www.orphandriftarchive.com/articles/hyperstition-an-
introduction/).

More:

A hyperstition is the opposite of a superstition. A superstition is a “false
belief” but a hyperstition is an idea that operates in culture to bring about
its own reality.

This is a term I’ve come to prefer to “design fiction” because it foregrounds
the goal of autonomous persuasion.

It is _wild_ to me that the clearest visualisation of a world in which high
technology is used to live in accordance with the Earth, and to relish in
family life, a solarpunk vision, [is a TV commercial called Dear
Alice](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z-Ng5ZvrDm4) _(YouTube)_ by animation
house The Line and yoghurt manufacturer Chobani. (To note: [Chobani are pretty
progressive in their own
right](https://solarpunks.net/post/644664333664665600/chobani-out-here-
showing-us-a-greener-brighter).)

_Like, more of that please??_

But for policy makers.

So I feel that this is something special that artists and designers do.

Whether we call it design fiction or
[pathfinding](/home/2022/10/20/pathfinding) or the manifestation of [design
and belief](/home/2023/05/19/protocols), there’s this power - in small ways,
sketching an app and enticing the product managers, or in major ways, shifting
policy - to dream dreams in such a way that we are all compelled to bring
those objects back from the other side of the bridge.

That is my challenge and my hope, and I’m speaking here to a room of new
design students at colleges all over the world, showing your work today, this
is my challenge and my hope for you.
