# Driving at night

I was driving in the dark last week and listening to the whole [Twin Peaks
soundtrack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soundtrack_from_Twin_Peaks)
_(Wikipedia)._

Wife napping. Kid asleep in the back. No road lighting, no Moon.

On YouTube: [Angelo Badalamenti Twin Peaks
theme.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pXrjMaVoTy0) 1990!

It holds up, it holds up.

Also on YouTube: [Angelo Badalamenti explains how he wrote Laura Palmer’s
theme](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e-eqgr_gn4k) \- so beautiful, do please
watch this, you have to hear him play and narrate how he worked with David
Lynch.

For ‘Laura Palmer’s Theme,’ he described a lonely girl coming from out in the
woods, and the sycamore trees calmly blowing in the wind, and then make me
start on a melody. He would always speak very softly in my ear, and I would
play something the whole time while he was speaking. _Oh, Angelo, we’re in the
dark woods, that’s good, that’s good. Play it slower. De-da-de-da-de-da. Play
it slower, okay. Angelo, yeah, that’s good, you slowed up, but play it
slower._

So you see it fits very well.

Taillights and headlights and dreamy haunting jazz.

Such a vibe, you know?

There are a few albums that work best, driving in the dark. _Dummy_ (1994) by
Portishead is one.

_The Dead Texan._

Literally anything by Cliff Martinez, the _Solaris_ soundtrack for instance.

Which of course takes me to my favourite TV ad of all time which is [Night
Driving](https://www.adforum.com/talent/18007-noam-murro/work/6697638) _(Ad
Forum; watch the 90 second spot there)_ for VW Golf by adam&eveDDB. Cliff
Martinez, the dark empty streets of LA, and _Under Milkwood_ read by Dylan
Thomas.

It’s such an eternal cognitive location, night driving.

Different thoughts come when you access that state.

Like writing PowerPoint in hotel lobbies.

I talked about this! [Three feelings that I don’t have words
for](/home/2020/09/29/three_feelings) _(2020)._

Number #3: "Hotel lobbies always feel the same to me. The exotic, and
melancholy."

The hotel lobby exists outside time. In that place, I’m 28, I’m 42, I’m all
ages in-between. I feel like, sitting there in 2012, I could probably remember
the future yesterday of 2016 …

Atemporality.

This moment of communion is also picked up on by Borges, [as previously
discussed](/home/2012/01/01/irrecoverable) _(2012),_ not just breaking the
barrier of time but also the barrier of individuality:

"All men who repeat a line of Shakespeare are William Shakespeare."

I think you access something other and special when you escape time, escape
selfhood, whether that’s driving in the dark or sitting in a hotel lobby or
walking, that’s another one.

It does a disservice to this cognitive state to believe that it can be found
only with psychedelics or meditation or whatever, whereas there are mundane
apertures too,

and we do a disservice to alternative cognitive states to choose to name
_“flow,”_ simply because it relates to productivity, and to leave nameless
this mode of becoming diffuse and sensitive, able to sense resonances and new
ideas from species memory and from the future, and from there, pluck them, and
return home with them.
