# Domestic telepresence at scale: some notes

After I posted about [video calls, doing stuff together, and the TV
room](/home/2020/04/22/the_viewing_room), there was a great discussion on
Twitter. Listen to some of these ideas:

…which I’m into as an idea! I like the idea of a scheduled group call that
fires up on your TV at 2pm for an hour whether you’re there or not. Also I
think there’s a lot to be said for ambient noise – it’d be neat to hear the
muffled sound of activity on the other side of the TV screen.

There was a good discussion about how you could do a “keep the doors open”
kind of telepresence, but without massive privacy violations. Even a dithered
e-ink screen would today require an internet-connected, always-on camera
pointing directly into your house. Scary.

I really like the idea of computer networking protocols that are _human
readable._ I have a vague memory of reading about an audible protocol that
sounded like birdsong? The advantage being that if a hacker was trying to get
into your network, you would hear it.

On the other end of things:

Tonari is for businesses, it’s not made for the domestic context. And I like
the idea that sometimes you’re having a meeting, but sometimes you fall into
an opportunistic water-cooler chat, and the rest of the time your colleagues
are just _there,_ the ebbs and flows of the two offices brought together,
however far apart.

I mean…

Some of these ideas are pretty weird. BUT. But. Why not give them a go? The
_feeling_ of it all. It would be good.

I’ve been trying to put a name to what it is I’m circling, and the best I can
I can come up with is this: **domestic telepresence at scale.**

By **telepresence** there’s the usual meaning, being [telepresence
robots](/home/2011/01/19/telepresence_robots) _(which come and go in the
zeitgeist, that post is from 2011)._ But ALSO AND MORE REALISTICALLY I would
include group video calls. The robots being something more like “peak”
telepresence?

Actually, I would include anything that contributes to this feeling of
togetherness… fictional ideas like the idea above of transmitting the ambient
noise of the home so I feel like a family member is in an adjacent room, and
also real ones like “availability” indicators, and WhatsApp read receipts, and
so on.

What I’ve learnt from my experiences with casual Zooms with friends, or
[hanging out in social
Slacks](http://interconnected.org/home/2015/10/08/tomtown), or doing workouts
with my family in Australia with a combination of YouTube Live and group
FaceTimes is that these technologies all combine to produce a sense of
togetherness, they all count!

Telepresence isn’t something you step into, rather it’s a gradient. Your
attention can be fully or only partially split between the local and the
remote. And you’re in multiple groups of course, each of which has different
compositions and norms. So you need all these different approaches at
different levels for peak telepresence to even have a chance to occur.

Then there’s that word **domestic.**

I can’t even imagine what this lockdown would have been like without the
internet. I’m with my family and friends, even though we’re physically
sometimes thousands of miles apart. And although I’m giving the internet
credit, I will also say that the internet has not really served us that well.
The fact that we have this sense of togetherness right now, domestically, is
because there is an amazing mass co-opting of technology going on:

Zoom was not made for people to play bridge! Facetime wasn’t created to be
left propped up in a corner while we sing “twinkle twinkle little star” and
then wander off to make a cup of tea while people come and go from the room.
But imagine if these technologies _had_ been built for these behaviours!

Look. People in business will do all kinds of bonkers things if there is
Return On Investment.

But “domestic” means having TVs which are shared devices, and phones which are
private. It means group accounts. It means old people and young people. It
means different rooms in the house. The domestic world is more diverse, more
messy, and more demanding. Software isn’t built for this.

What’s particularly energising about this period of [forced
experiments](https://www.ben-evans.com/benedictevans/2020/4/13/covid-and-
forced-experiments), as Benedict Evans calls it, or less abstractly, _“not
being allowed to see our friends”,_ is that I’ve been reminded that
telepresence is powerful and people want it when it works and there is a
absolute TON for us still to explore.

**At scale.**

The reason I include _“scale”_ is because I want to figure out how to continue
to have this sense of togetherness available for everyone… even after we’re
allowed to leave our homes.

When the lockdown ends, a lot of this co-opting of technology will end too.
That’s a shame.

Anyway, in all of this _domestic telepresence_ I would include

In what world could [Good Night Lamps](http://goodnightlamp.com) be just at
home on my shelves as my books are?

Any _one_ of these on their own would be weird. But together, and normalised
somehow…

I think what the **“at scale”** requirement makes me ask is: how could these
be mainstreamed, and how could people almost compose their own experiences
through all kinds of different services and devices, without having to do
things like create a new social network in a thousand different places?

I don’t see that the answer could ever be a single service doing it “right”:
there can’t be a single “winner” such as Zoom, or Facebook, or WeChat, no
matter how many features they throw in. People and groups are too different.

So I think of iPhones and Amazon Echoes.

iPhones and Echoes both pass [Google’s toothbrush
test](https://dealbook.nytimes.com/2014/08/17/in-silicon-valley-mergers-must-
meet-the-toothbrush-test/): "Is it something you will use once or twice a day,
and does it make your life better?"

But nobody’s iPhone and nobody’s Echo is the same. We call it “downloading
apps” but really what’s happening is that people are making their devices
radically different – a camera for one person, a TV for the next. They’re
twice-a-day toothbrushes, sure, but it’s a different toothbrush for everyone.

Maybe there’s a lesson here?

I guess what I’m speculating is a kind of social operating system that links
all these different parts, and allows new ones to emerge.

Something that doesn’t abstract Zoom, Facebook, and Animal Crossing, but sits
alongside them and someone provides visibility between them (or not, as
appropriate).

What would it mean to see that your friends are congregating watching Netflix
(remotely) while you’re still at work? How could they hassle and yell at you
to come hang out already?

A digital photo frame that understands it’s in the shared front room and
somehow shares only the pictures appropriate to that context from everyone in
the house?

What about something that lets me and my group step up a gear from iMessage
not into FaceTime, but into toy telepresence robots, playing an obstacle
course that somebody has cobbled together in their front room?

Feeling my way around something here. Not sure what it is yet.
