# The continuing rise of virtual private neighbourhoods

People are increasingly hanging out in small, private communities. Global
timelines and newsfeeds won’t come back.

The shift looks something like this:

As covered by [this excellent edition of Garbage
Day](https://www.garbageday.email/p/tfw-a-crustacean), Twitter shows all the
characteristics of a rotting online community. How to recognise a rotting
community, quoting the full list:

Power users aggressively dominate discussion on the site.

Public harassment and inter-community elitism has created a culture of
indirect communication, where users no longer directly say what they’re
actually trying to say.

There is no longer any internal cultural memory.

Users have become so obsessed with the minutiae of the community that the site
now functions as a meta discussion of itself instead of whatever its intended
purpose was.

Poor or lax moderation has created a sense that nothing on the site is genuine

- fake users, fake trending topics, fake threads, fake engagement.

Users, reacting to the inauthentic behavior, public harassment, and elitism
that occurs due to bad moderation, create their own self-policed communities
within the larger community, which typically only exacerbates these problems
and creates warring factions within the site.

Meanwhile, only the olds use Facebook (including me), but everyone younger has
mostly vanished, being increasingly uncomfortable with

So this is the end of the era of global timelines. Who would take on the
responsibility of content moderation to build another one.

Where is everybody going instead?

Well there are the peer-to-peer and small group spaces of texting and
WhatsApp.

But the problem of peer-to-peer is that you don’t get those joyous,
serendipitous moments of running into like-minded friends-of-friends.

In-between:

There are private Discords, private Slack channels, and a flurry of [spatial
interfaces in development](/home/2020/07/23/spatial_interfaces). They’re
immune to data harvesting, invisible from search engines, and there’s no
context collapse – good fences make good neighbours.

As the global timelines get abandoned, this is where people are homesteading.

And doing all the usual things of chatting, sharing links, giving support,
falling out, making jokes, and all the rest.

…Or so I’m told.

I’m no zillennial hanging out in a handful of private Discords. Instead I have
a blog, which is like being a big noise in ham radio, or an unironic
aficionado of VHS.

My own, limited experience of this, from back in 2015:

If the global timeline feels like a city, a private Slack group feels like a
neighbourhood.

I do _not_ include in this “virtual neighbourhood” space media like
newsletters and podcasts, both growing fast rn.

Perhaps what we’re seeing is the disentangling of social media back into
social _and_ media: newsletters and podcasts are best understood as being part
of the media spectrum, even if many of them are smaller and have community
spaces attached. And Discord space, Slack spaces, etc, these virtual
neighbourhoods are pure social.

I’d love to understand these virtual neighbourhoods better.

My _hunch_ is their optimum size will hover around the [Dunbar number of
~150](/home/2003/10/26/two_things), fewer if you’re just looking at active
members (you need a mix of active and less active in any community).

But has anyone published any research on this?

What is the distribution of populations of private Discord groups and other
similar spaces? How many groups do people belong to? How does this time take
away from other activities? Is there a typology of groups and how they start?
How well do people know each other? Is there a typical lifecycle? Are there
temporary groups and persistent groups? Is there a difference in the culture
created vs the global timelines? Etc.

And let’s assume that this grows into the dominant mode of socialising online
in the 2020s:
