# Lightbulbs were so startup

Edison invented the first practical incandescent electric light in 1879. (That
is, the filament lasted more than a few hours.)

But it couldn’t be brought to consumers because there was no commercially-
available electricity.

AND SO:

In 1882, the _Edison Illuminating Company_ opened the first commercial power
plant in the United States: [Pearl Street
Station](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pearl_Street_Station) _(Wikipedia)_ in
Lower Manhattan.

Starting small… "it started generating electricity on September 4, 1882,
serving an initial load of 400 lamps at 82 customers. By 1884, Pearl Street
Station was serving 508 customers with 10,164 lamps."

They had to invent a new kind of dynamo to generate the electricity. Ahead of
the power station, Edison ran a number of pop-ups as prototypes.

HOWEVER: power distribution.

… perhaps the greatest challenge was building the elaborate network of wires
and underground tubes (called “conduits”) needed to deliver energy to
customers. _New York City politicians were initially skeptical and rejected
Edison’s proposal to dig up the streets of lower Manhattan to install the
needed 100,000 feet of wiring. Eventually, however, Edison was able to
convince the mayor of the city otherwise._ The conduit installation proved to
be one of the most expensive parts of the whole project.

Not only a distribution problem, but a backchannel conversation between people
with power to get around the rules. Capitalists gonna capitalise.

AND THERE’S MORE: the business model.

Since the early 1800s there had been special instruments to detect the flow of
a current and indicate how much of it was flowing, but there was not an
instrument to record that flow over time. Not until the spring of 1882 was a
successful design for an electric meter available. However, Edison did not
send bills to his customers until the whole system was running reliably, which
took some more time. The first electric bill was sent to the Ansonia brass and
copper company on 18 January 1883 and was for $50.44.

_(That quote from the same ETHW article linked above.)_

In addition light bulbs cost $1 ea.

The setup cost (including real estate) was $300,000 – a lot to return, 50
bucks at a time.

The company ran at a loss until 1884. Pearl Street Station burnt down in 1890,
was rebuilt, then in 1895 decommissioned when it was made obsolete by newer,
larger power stations.

A single value-creating innovation requiring a vast hinterland of enabling
technologies in order to connect the product to its market.

It’s so startup it hurts.

Questions I have:

Did Edison have a team of 1880s MBA-equivalents, crunching the numbers to
figure out what to do?

What was the mood around electric lighting back then? Did it feel like a hype
train? Was the social media of the time full of wild speculation about the
social changes that would be unleashed and the fortunes that would be made?

Electricity, generally, had that aura of excitement. A few years back I read
every issue of _Electrical Review_ from the 1880s and 1890s which covered the
rollout of the telegraph and then lighting, simultaneous with figuring out the
science of how electricity behaved _([I wrote up my observations
here](/home/2021/10/06/electricity))_ – but I think I need to go back and read
the preceding decade too.
