# Is collective efficacy a human need?

Do we have a deep-seated need to feel part of a empowered group?

I ran across this concept in an profile of Greta Thunberg in the _FT._

Sabherwal’s paper found that people who had heard of Thunberg were likely to
feel a stronger sense of “collective efficacy”, the belief that they could
make a difference by acting together.

That’s an interesting feeling to stick a pin in: the sense that you are part
of a group with strength.

Having named the feeling, I think we can ask and immediately answer two
follow-up questions:

Which implies! Amongst all the groups a person encounters, they will move up
the gradient towards stronger collective efficacy. i.e. if there are two
groups, A and B, which are otherwise entirely equal but group B has a lever to
choose the colour of the bike shed, people will move to group B.

Or if people feel alienated in society, the “containing” group, but some
political group, or radical organisation, or whatever, promises the ability to
change how things work then, by osmosis, those groups will grow in popularity.

Way too simplistic conclusion: the answer to radicalisation is to increase the
collective efficacy of society - to increase people’s ability to be part of
meaningful change - reducing the osmotic pressure that drives people into
fringe groups.

It seems obvious written down like this, but I hadn’t thought of it from quite
that angle before.

Practically, if we assume that _“collective efficacy tropism”_ is a thing that
humans have, we can ask questions about limits: How _small_ can collective
efficacy be, and still modify behaviour?

Like, do the follow qualify as teeny-weeny collective efficacy ocean floor
thermal vents:

Clearly at a larger scale, it’s incredibly powerful to feel part of something.
Remember [reddit’s amazing Place project of
2017](https://hyperallergic.com/371903/more-than-a-million-strangers-
collaborate-pixel-by-pixel-on-a-digital-canvas/).

But if it’s really an honest-to-goodness human need, even if imperceptible in
many cases, what strategies are there to **design for collective efficacy,**
from micro to macro?

And if a software product is designed _without_ any such possibility (I pick
on software because with physical spaces you get it for free) then will it
always feel, in some nameless way, hollow?
