# Taking shots from Einstein’s brain

I knew the beginning bit of this story from Joshua Cohen. I didn’t know the
end.

"When Einstein died, IN 1955, his brain was removed during an unsanctioned
autopsy at a hospital in Princeton."

From there, a pathologist named Thomas Stoltz Harvey sliced it up but kept
some for himself. He moved to Kansas, and gave one of the slivers to William
S. Burroughs. Who died in 1997, and the sliver was passed to… Cohen demurs,
because of this:

Let’s just say that when I was in Lawrence, teaching at KU, this was a thing
that still happened, a hazing that was also an homage: You scooped the bit of
Einstein’s brain out of the jar and shook off the excess formaldehyde; then,
you put some salt in the crook of your thumb and licked it, after which you
took down a shot of cheap room-temperature tequila and sucked on the brain-bit
until your mouth went numb-until the formaldehyde paralyzed your lips and
tongue and you couldn’t be understood, you couldn’t even feel yourself trying
to make language.

My question is, given the moment and the opportunity, what would you do?

There’s an element of magic about this. Einstein’s brain is sacred, somehow,
it has a kind of power, because of its association with Albert Einstein
himself and his actions when alive.

Clearly I wouldn’t shoot tequila from just _anyone’s_ brain. And there’s no
actual eating going on. It’s not cannibalism. But if it was, say, Einstein’s
_sock_ I would most likely decline. In this particular case… probably?

So what we’re saying is that there’s a magical power, which has a force. And
then there are forces that counter that force: natural disgust, effort made
for the opportunity, and so on. The rest of the discussion is about constant
factors and polynomials: what is the formula of the magical force? It feels
like this could be an empirical investigation, which is how all scientific
breakthroughs begin.

Now this is maybe an unexpected direction to take this post but, as a student,
ex-PM David Cameron famously [put his unmentionables into the mouth of a dead
pig](https://www.vox.com/2015/9/21/9365507/piggate-david-cameron-piers-
galverston).

This is, at best, [type 2 fun](https://kellycordes.com/2009/11/02/the-fun-
scale/). And the question is, what wins out? The disgust at the act? Or the
thought: _“but yeah then I could say I did.”_ To put it another way, making
use of the pig’s head is a magical act that generates status and power. Like,
_clearly_ you would feel like you had crossed some kind of threshold – to have
done what others had not! And that internal knowledge will, by association, in
the future make it possible for you to cross _other_ thresholds that others
could not. Magic!

I have to say, I think if the opportunity came up, I might do the same. I
think many people felt the same way, which is why - when the story came out in
2015 and many people mocked him about it - ultimately it did Cameron no harm.

There’s a famous quote [from comedian Billy
Connolly](https://twitter.com/qikipedia/status/400337764849168385?lang=en):
"Never trust a man who, when left alone in a room with a tea cosy, doesn’t try
it on."

Same same?
