# What to call execution by electricity in 1889

Years ago I read every issue of _Electrical Review_ magazine from the 1880s
and 1890s.

Or at least leafed through. I was in the library anyway (you can prise my
_British Library_ reader pass from my cold dead hands) in the middle of a long
unrelated project, and sometimes you just need to use the fact there are
centuries of STUFF in the stacks you can just ask for, and spend a day like a
pig in the proverbial.

The reason being:

I had recently read Carolyn Marvin’s excellent social history _When Old
Technologies Were New_ (1988; [on Google
Books](https://www.google.co.uk/books/edition/When_Old_Technologies_Were_New/GgepDgAAQBAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1)),
subtitle: "Thinking About Electric Communication in the Late Nineteenth
Century."

The 1880s saw the maturity of the electrical telegraph; the 1890s the roll-out
of the electric light.

Meanwhile they were (a) understanding electricity as a phenomenon; and (b)
inventing wildly to figure out what it could do. Very much like the internet
today.

There’s a throwaway comment in the book about, well:

In response to an inquiry about _the best word to express “execution by
electricity,”_ the _Electrical Review_ reported a variety of suggestions,
including _elektrophon, electricize, electrony, electrophony, thanelectrize,
thanelectricize, thanelectrisis, electromort, electrotasy, fulmen,
electricide, electropoenize, electrothenese, electrocution, electroed,
electrostrike,_ “and finally joltacuss of voltacuss.”

_Reference given in the footnotes:_

“Which Shall It Be?”, _Electrical Review,_ Aug. 17, 1889, p. 20

(Ultimately, of course, and this is a bit grim, execution is execution. The
method is hardly what matters. But watching people figure out naming is always
fascinating because you are watching people figure out how to describe and
work with the world.)

So I wanted to read the original correspondence.

I didn’t manage to. It turns out there were two _Electrical Review_ magazines.
The exchange re executioners was in the US version of the title; I was reading
the one from the UK.

YET: time well spent.

What struck me was the mix of content.

In each issue I could find

The impression I came away with was that this was a community trying to figure
out the world together.

At this time with electricity, it wasn’t clear what datapoints were salient.
Was it important that the bowl was scorched in the lightning report? Unknown!
So report it anyway! The scientific method: gather observations; taxonomise
and hypothesise; predict and iterate. This era was step 1 going into step 2.

It’s obvious to us _now_ that electricity does not thin the veil between this
world and the afterlife – but in an era where a power used to replace
crankshafts in factories was then used to transmit the written word between
continents and then, bizarrely, provide artificial light, well, who is to say
what would happen next.

So the boundary of electricity was as-yet undefined. Oversharing was a virtue.

I love this era of a new field. Not just the possibility of surprise round
every corner, but the collective, heady nature of the endeavour. We’re making
these discoveries together!

And we’re making new discoveries by wildly building new things and reporting
back what happened. Theory and practice in a tight and lively knot. The best
place to spend one’s days.
