# Who will be the new babysitters for my new needy AI apps?

[I used to play _Animal Crossing_ a bunch](/home/2006/01/28/i_am_genmon)
_(2006)._

You know, the Nintendo game where you live in a village of talking animal
friends. When it’s light out, it’s light in-game; when it’s dark, it’s dark;
when it’s summer, it’s summer.

It keeps you playing!

The stick.

What happens when that stick is how high-engagement apps compete?

We can start feeling out this future already.

A wave of AI dolls will soon be upon us.

Including dolls for adults…

Now, this $1,800 AI-enabled doll may well look like something you’d find in a
haunted attic, but it’s actually meant to act as an interactive digital pal
for people who are lonely or in long-term care facilities.

Thanks to the large language model stuffed inside the doll, the Hyodol can
supposedly hold conversations with its owners, as well as provide health
reminders such as when to take medication or eat a meal. It’s every bit as
connected as you can imagine, with a companion app and web monitoring platform
that lets caretakers monitor the device and its user from afar.

I’m going to include software dolls in this:
[character.ai](https://character.ai) and [Replika](https://replika.com) are
both about making AI buddies.

And I am _not_ saying this is a bad thing:

So we’ve got traditional jobs to be done _plus_ the pseudo-social interaction
that AI allows.

This is the future of software.

[Chris Dixon](https://cdixon.org/2010/01/03/the-next-big-thing-will-start-out-
looking-like-a-toy) in 2010: "The next big thing will start out looking like a
toy."

Toy PCs displace the mainframe for business computing.

Toy character-based AIs displace… Excel?

I mean, why not. You don’t replace the software directly. Instead, [from my
post about AI agents last week](/home/2024/03/20/agents): "integrate the AI
into the customer’s business by giving it a well-understood job role."

Now, how about that stick?

Here’s where the stick comes in:

The logic of the attention economy is that apps (services, media, social
networks, games) need usage not just to monetise through ads but to stay top
of mind and produce growth.

So they work on _engagement._ On being sticky.

This is the reason that my home maintenance app sends me a notification about
something asinine, just to ensure that I don’t forget about it.

The attention economy ain’t going anywhere.

So my observation with AI-enabled apps is this:

Look out for your Excel copilot giving you sadface if you forget to open it
for a day.

Let me try putting this another way.

The underlying attribute of the app era has been FOMO.

_Fear of Missing Out._ [Coined in 2004 by Patrick
McGinnis](https://www.bostonmagazine.com/news/2014/07/29/fomo-history/)
_(2014, Boston magazine):_

Every generation has its afflictions. The early-20th-century Viennese had the
Oedipus complex. Twentysomethings of the 1990s had angst and ennui. What
McGinnis had stumbled on-FOMO-would soon become a hallmark of the digital age.

I don’t just mean obvious FOMO, as in Facebook.

In its distilled form, FOMO is the red dot.

All apps give me notifications. Photos tells me that it has a new set of old
pics to go through (why can’t I be trusted to stumble across the shoebox of
photos on my own?). Dropbox tells me that my colleague has downloaded the
transfer (do I need to know? Aren’t we already working together?).

With AI, the structure of feeling is changing.

As FOMO was to the 2010s, the 2020s will be about the carrot and stick of
relationship.

What does that look like in its essence?

I don’t know! If FOMO led to the pervasive red dot…

…then what happens when you purify _social obligation_ down to a crystal just
a few pixels across?

Will apps need to be cajoled and reassured that you love them, if you neglect
them for a few days? Will your email app be sluggish and drag its heels when
you get back from your vacation?

What does a home screen _full_ of these little needy agents look like, all
competing for our affection?

This is already happening, it’s just not evenly distributed. For instance:

If you’ve never been subjected to automated [drip
marketing](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d/drip-marketing.asp) emails
then consider yourself lucky.

They start as emails that sound as if they come from a legit human, asking for
a link on your homepage, or offering to help with some design work, something
you’ve mentioned on LinkedIn perhaps.

As you don’t reply, they send nudges and reminders. Fine, fine.

Then sometimes, not always but sometimes, you get emails like

Matt?? Are you not getting these emails or rudely ignoring me

And it is SO RUDE. Is the email author so distanced by automation that they
write passive aggressive messages that they’d never send personally?

This is the mode of interaction that will accelerate, evolve, get more subtle,
and get baked into our KPIs, dashboards, and interfaces.

Oh or the Duolingo owl.

[Weaponised guilt-
tripping](https://www.theverge.com/2018/12/13/18137843/duolingo-owl-redesign-
language-learning-app) _(2018):_ "We would show him crying, and I think that
one had the most profound effect on people."

If you want a picture of the future, imagine feeling like you suck because a
green cartoon owl is crying – forever.

Back to the creepy dolls!

Because there’s a solution to that at least.

There will come a point where AI toys need constant attention, otherwise they
will degrade and spiral off into ugly self pity.

But people will want to collect and keep them.

So there will be _another_ device, a kind of rocking doll, which talks to the
companion dolls all day to keep them happy.

There’s a sketch on John Finnemore’s radio show about last time this happened.

Here’s the transcript. It’s about luxury wristwatches:

a watchmaker discovered a way to use the natural movements of the wearer’s arm
to keep the mechanical ones charged, without needing either manual winding or
batteries. These became the most highly priced and expensive of all. But some
very, very rich people might have two such watches. Or even more! And then,
the ones that weren’t being worn would begin to loose their charge.

And so, the luxury watch companies began to make and sell these objects, to
their richest clients. Machines, in which the buyer could store up to four of
his spare, luxury, battery-less watches, which would rock them ceaselessly to
and fro to simulate the movements of the arm and keep them charged.

I’m not saying you’re _definitely_ going to need an automatic watch winder to
keep _Photoshop 2028_ happy and motivated, in the same way you needed anti-
virus software in the 2000s, and you spent your 2010s marking everything as
_read._

But honestly I wouldn’t be surprised.

At least until they invent self-satisfying software to go along with [Self-
Satisfied Doors](http://technovelgy.com/ct/content.asp?Bnum=135) anyway.
[Welcome to the era of Douglas Adams technology.](/home/2024/02/21/adams)
