# Welcome to the Entropocene

Back in 2019 there was a risk that the UK would exit the EU with no trade deal
at all, and supply chains would be sufficiently disrupted that shop shelves
would run empty etc.

So we built up a contingency stash in the room upstairs, mainly baby things:
medicine, nappies, long-life milk, etc, then added tinned and dry goods like
pasta and chopped tomatoes.

We didn’t need it. (My guess is that supermarkets and suppliers had assessed
the risk and built up their warehouses, which stabilised those first few
weeks.)

BUT our Brexit No Deal stash had a second life as a Covid Supermarkets Can’t
Cope stash.

Online orders were rationed in the first lockdown in early 2020. Our existing
accounts we used to get deliveries for our parents. Then for a few weeks we
couldn’t get groceries – we dipped into the stash a few times (then kept it
topped up). Handy.

I have been eying the remainder of the contingency stash. Time to wind it
down? Maybe. Maybe not.

These days supermarket shelves run empty frequently enough that they’ve
[printed special boxes to fill the
space](https://twitter.com/genmon/status/1418922430505136132?s=21). Post-
Brexit problems with not enough delivery drivers? Or the “pingdemic” – a half
million people are self-isolating right now because they’ve been pinged by the
Covid contact tracing system. So the shops are all short-staffed. Or is it
just that online grocery orders are being prioritised over actual shelves?
(E-commerce has boomed in the UK, way more than the US.)

Then there are the flash floods in London from recent storms. I look at the
closed roads and think, _well clearly that’s not going to help._

I mean it’s multi-factor isn’t it.

One thing reduces resilience in the supply chain such that another thing
knocks it out entirely.

And it’s global and it’s unpredictable. The Suez Canal shutdown led to [garden
gnome shortages in Whitminster](/home/2021/04/16/factories). Hard to imagine
that would have happened before a year of the system being stressed with
Covid. (All the shipping containers are in the wrong places. The cost of a
container on the Asia-Europe route [is up
5x](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-05-27/shipping-container-
rates-top-10-000-from-asia-to-europe).)

All of which means I’m looking at my stash (after almost two years) and
thinking maybe it has a third life as an Extreme Weather Event contingency
larder.

I hadn’t expected that. I live in the UK, and we don’t have earthquakes or
wildfires so I’ve never had to make up a Go Bag.

But honestly I look at the weather, here, and think of the ancient viruses
being thawed out in the permafrost, a thousand miles away, and this is
basically the rest of my life now isn’t it. Always keep a cache of dried pasta
and garden gnomes in the back room, you never know.

The world is fragile.

Rod McLaren invented a word for it in his latest edition of the Co-op Digital
newsletter, which is ostensibly about technology and groceries. But:

Every newsletter is now a climate change newsletter, because climate change is
the landscape now. _We now live in the “entropocene”,_ an era of larger,
quicker, less predictable, non-linear change.

**The Entropocene.** The new geological era of entropy.

It turn out McLaren’s _Entropocene_ is a parallel coinage because of course it
is – all experiences are shared global experiences now.

Here, for example, in an article also introducing this new word, is a strong
plea to stop using the word _Anthropocene_ to refer to this new epoch:

Have you ever felt the toxic touch of the word “Anthropocene”? If you haven’t,
I could put it in a simple way. Considering that the near-collapsing state of
our planet is due to the _Anthropos_ in general means that we take the Inuits
or the Jivaros for responsible of the situation, in the same way that our
modern occidental civilization. This sounds absurd, since they are amongst the
first victims of capitalistic greed, deforestation, and climate change. And
that all in the name of a “universal mankind” (the Anthropos), a concept they
never ask or stand for. In other words, one is mistaking the victims for the
predators when using the word Anthropocene. And it all sounds like the last
dirty joke of Western White Man, his Empires and his Capital.

It is a great point.

Yes, the concept of the
[Anthropocene](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anthropocene) points out that
humans wield global power and have global impact. When archaeologists a
million years hence dig down, there will be a line of microplastics,
radioactivity, and high atmospheric CO2, and they’ll point to the thin stratum
and say, _aha, the human era._

But as they say: not all humans.

Yes this is an era characterised by a "general and accelerated process towards
the maximal disorder leading to social and political dislocation" \- entropy -
but Disaster Capitalism is not a universal phenomenon. It is incorrect to pin
the Anthropocene on humankind at large. So let’s not bake it into the name.

Entropocene it is.
