# Alternative epistemic agents for restaurant menus etc

The dessert menu at _Le Relais de Venise_ has red and blue underlines, which
maybe represent IRL user interface for epistemic agents, and I kinda feel like
(a) this is a prototype for smart glasses, and (b) I would like this
everywhere (but better).

If you haven’t eaten at _Le Relais de Venise,_ it’s useful to know that there
is only one option. You get steak, fries, salad, and their signature parsley
sauce. When you finish your plate, you get the identical thing again. No other
dishes available. It opened in 1959 in Paris and [it has since instanced in a
handful other cities](https://relaisdevenise.com/our-story.php).

The dessert menu, by contrast, is lengthy. [Here it is on my
Instagram.](https://www.instagram.com/p/CbdPkB2rCy-/)

The key: Underlines = most popular items. Top with chocolate in red, top
without in blue.

I had to ask the waiter to learn this fact, which is by-the-by a neat micro
interaction engaging you in the dessert consideration funnel.

I like this! Here is Amazon-e-commerce-style social recommendation and social
proof embedded as print in the dessert menu. It’s PageRank for pudding.

BUT: other types of recommendation algorithm are available.

In [Reasonable People #26](https://tomstafford.substack.com/p/epistemic-
agents), Tom Stafford begins by reviewing _Knowledge in a Social World_ (1999)
by Alvin Goldman – then riffs on software, social media, and **epistemic
agents:** "autonomous agents, computational entities that cooperate with a
user in the service of information-gathering tasks." (Goldman’s words.)

It _used_ to be, says Stafford, that there were _many_ tools to explore and
develop knowledge.

For example (quoting Goldman again), a tool for searching the web:

The Scatter/Gather system can analyze those pages and divide them into
clusters based on their similarity to one another. Aunt Alice can scan each
cluster and select those that appear most relevant. If she decides she likes a
cluster of 293 texts summarized by “bulb,” “soil,” and “gardener,” she can run
them through Scatter/Gather again, rescattering them into more specific
clusters.

Super neat!

But this variety of tools has vanished. The agents have folded into the
applications.

On the modern internet, except when we search, we hardly think at all of
ourselves using epistemic agents at all. …

Delegation of tasks on our knowledge quests hasn’t gone away. Instead,
epistemic agents are now deeply encapsulated in the sites and apps we use.
Companies design and deploy the epistemic agents and we buy their services,
based on them “just working” - in other words, accurately guessing what will
make us happy. So Spotify makes a mix which is a pleasing blend of songs I
already know and like and new songs which I have a good chance of liking.
Amazon suggests products I might like to buy in combination with my current
purchase.

AND:

_Along with this encapsulation, it seems like one epistemic agent ate all the
others - recommendation._ Whether it is new music, concurrent purchases, or
which the best take-away is in my area, most epistemic tasks can be looked at
as recommendations.

In particular, says Stafford: SOCIAL recommendation won.

And he asks: is it possible any longer to imagine other epistemic agents?

The recommendation algorithms in these platforms are great at showing me more
of what I like, but are there any which try and identify gaps in my experience
and surprise me? The algorithms are great for promoting affiliation,
suggesting people I might know, but _are there any which deliberately try and
open new vistas in my social network_ , rather than merely complete triadic
closure?

(Triadic closure is a concept in network theory which is when a network
cluster gets more densely interlinked, instead of enlarging and bridging to
other clusters.)

It’s provocative!

[It is healthy to name the algorithm](/home/2020/09/07/algorithms) _(as
previously discussed; 2020)._ The algorithmic newsfeed in Facebook is
embedded, so it feels “natural,” but imagine if there was some kind of truth-
in-advertising type of legislation.

What if it were law to name the algorithm according to its reward function?

And you would get to choose.

But those are still forms of social recommendation, however.

Stafford’s provocation makes me imagine epistemic agents which are anti-social
or anti-recommenders or anti making you happy as a reward function, or all of
the above…

That kind of thing.

Let’s assume we’ll all have augmented reality, networked smart glasses in a
year or two.

So we can expand the _Le Relais de Venise_ approach in two directions perhaps.

**What if my future smart glasses showed me the top three in ANY category,
using that same visual language?**

…walk into a book store, see the current top fiction books with a red halo;
the current top non-fiction with a blue on. (Bonus points: “popular” according
to my chosen demographics and influencers.)

**What if the Le Relais dessert menu offered alternate epistemic agents?**

…look at a menu, run Scatter/Gather on any list. The words swim and reorganise
into categories; I pick one, focus, they re-categorise. Maybe not so useful
for the sweet course. Could be handy to learn about wine.

You may ask why I wasn’t focusing on dessert instead of spinning off about
agentive software UI and algorithmic hegemonies and taking notes for later.
Yes I ask myself that too. Focus on the cheesecake Matt.

[Many years ago I got obsessed with habit-breaking
days.](/home/2003/01/16/some_answers_to) We live our lives in self-reinforcing
networks of habits: you walk down the street so you see the Pret coffee shop
so you go in and you see the snack you always get and… BUT: walk down the
_other_ side of the street and your eye is caught by an old spot that you can
only see from that angle which takes you to a place where you try something
else and you sit in and do your emails before your commute so you get a seat
on the train aaaaand… you’ve got a new routine.

What if you discovered a secret toggle, deep in the Settings of your phone,
and it was labelled _“Routine”_ – and one morning you tapped “Turn off until
tomorrow.”

Then your Citymapper ranks a route at the top which is _almost_ as quick, but
you never take it. Your Priority Inbox makes sure it shows you emails from
people you typically don’t read. Your alarms are all late; you get breaking
news notifications from publications you don’t read. A klaxon goes off if you
get the same darn sandwich from the same darn place for lunch. Your phone
rings but actually it has spontaneously placed an outbound call and is just
letting you know. It has called your father. He doesn’t have a blue underline
in your contacts, which your phone knows. “Hello,” he says, picking up, “What
a surprise! I was just thinking about you.”
