# A starter list of ersatz foods

There are a bunch of ersatz foods that were invented out of scarcity and
necessity, but have somehow stuck around.

[Salad cream.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salad_cream) Canonical substitute
food done good. Basically a bit like tangy mayonaisse but with less expensive
mayonaisse and more oil and vinegar.

**Orange squash.** I’m guessing orange squash was as close as the chemicals
industry could get to orange juice without actually going near an orange, but
now I’ve started thinking about it, I quite fancy a glass.

[Ready Brek.](https://www.weetabixfoodcompany.co.uk/our-brands/ready-brek-
range) This is easy porridge I guess? I’m not sure if this qualifies as
“ersatz” because I think it may be simply branding a generic, which does not
count. But I am certainly into the way it is marketed [on the Tesco
website](https://www.tesco.com/groceries/en-GB/products/254853914) which
includes the immortal line "Oat grain fibre contributes to an increase in
faecal bulk." Which is… good? I guess?

**Margarine,** [surprisingly interesting butter
substitute.](https://www.mentalfloss.com/article/25638/surprisingly-
interesting-history-margarine):

[Emperor] Napoleon III saw that both his poorer subjects and his navy would
benefit from having easy access to a cheap butter substitute, so he offered a
prize for anyone who could create an adequate replacement.

Invented by a French chemist in 1869.

[Spam.](https://www.spam.com) I’ve not been to Hawaii but I’ve heard that
[spam is part of the cuisine
there](https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/mgx7yx/why-hawaiians-are-utterly-
obsessed-with-spam) – though from a distance it’s hard to tell whether the
spam love is ironic. Because it is _disgusting._

I debated about **monosodium glutamate** which was [invented in 1908 by
Kikunau Ikeda](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/its-the-umami-
stupid-why-the-truth-about-msg-is-so-easy-to-swallow-180947626/) as he worked
to isolate the meaty flavour of "dashi, a fermented base made from boiled
seaweed and dried fish." And MSG is now a common ingredient. Is it ersatz
dried fish? No, I think, like rosewater, we would call it an essence.

I’m trying to think of more. This is _possibly_ just because I like saying
“ersatz.” Possibly.
