# The Suez Canal and other global infrastructure exploits

There’s a large cargo vessel stuck in the Suez Canal right now, the 200,000
tonne _Ever Given._ It might be deliberate (although it’s probably not) and
it’s definitely disruptive. It may take weeks to clear. From [VesselFinder’s
recent update](https://www.vesselfinder.com/news/20472-UPDATE-4-on-Suez-Canal-
Blocked-by-Ever-Given-Japanese-owner-apologises-Refloating-efforts-Continue):

There are 14 gas carriers (LNG and LPG tankers) stuck south from the Suez
Canal behind the marooned Ever Given and another 7 carriers from the north,
and there are already signs the blockage is beginning to disrupt global gas
flows.

Around 8% of the global supply of fuel passes through the vital waterway, and
the only other option is a trip around Africa that would add 2 weeks more to
the journey.

I do wonder about these points of vulnerability in global infrastructure.

We’re now semi-accustomed to the idea that deliberate, state-sponsored disinfo
has been disrupting politics in the UK and US since the early/mid 2010s,
having targeted the engagement algorithms in social media to sow division.

I don’t think the disinfo has had any other objective than disruption – and
that’s enough. Disruption in one arena makes it hard for countries to act in
others.

So when a new point of vulnerability is revealed - such as the Suez Canal - my
thought process goes:

e.g. the Panama Canal. e.g. any other supply chain bottleneck.

This idea of “disruption” is highlighted in this 2018 report from the RAND
Corporation:

The Chinese People’s Liberation Army (PLA) now characterizes and understands
modern warfare as a confrontation between opposing _operational systems_
rather than merely opposing armies. Furthermore, the PLA’s very theory of
victory in modern warfare recognizes _system destruction warfare_ as the
current method of modern war fighting. Under this theory, warfare is no longer
centered on the annihilation of enemy forces on the battlefield. _Rather, it
is won by the belligerent that can disrupt, paralyze, or destroy the
operational capability of the enemy’s operational system._ This can be
achieved through kinetic and nonkinetic strikes against key points and nodes
while simultaneously employing a more robust, capable, and adaptable
operational system of its own.

Long story short, I keep a note of vulnerabilities when I hear about them.

Here’s an old one, from the _San Francisco Chronicle_ in 1977: [CIA Link to
Cuban Pig Virus
Reported](http://www.maebrussell.com/Health/CIA%20Pig%20Virus.html).

With at least the tacit backing of U.S. Central Intelligence Agency officials,
operatives linked to anti-Castro terrorists introduced African swine fever
virus into Cuba in 1971.

Especially relevant given the [Covid-19 lab leak
hypothesis](https://undark.org/2021/03/17/lab-leak-science-lost-in-politics/)
refuses to go away. Wherever Covid sits on the scale from deliberate to Act of
God, it’s now possible to quantify the level of disruption. In the next major
international treaty negotiation, watch out for one of the teams going down
with flu all at once at a critical moment. It would be simple to plant
influenza in a hotel, and now everyone’s seen how viruses work.

Another: [The 2018 Athens wildfires that killed 86
people.](https://www.keeptalkinggreece.com/2018/07/27/arson-linked-to-the-
death-of-at-least-86-in-athens-wildfires-picts/#.W1sBk18FZj0.twitter) "There
is serious evidence of arson for the Athens wildfires in East and West Attica,
the Greek government said during a press conference." It’s grim to
contemplate, but worst case scenario: What could this be a prototype for?

Weather, generally, is a big one, [as previously
discussed](/home/2020/06/30/space_and_weather). Climate change is in the
interest of at least some countries – if you’re geographically less
susceptible to flooding, for example. Or if your economy is already able to
shift away from carbon quickly, you can distract everyone else for a couple of
decades by ramping up the urgency faster. Climate change can also be
regionally targeted: increased weather volatility would make it simpler to tip
a food-producing region into drought for a few years using secret cloud
seeding.

There was that [Icelandic volcano in
2010](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Air_travel_disruption_after_the_2010_Eyjafjallaj%C3%B6kull_eruption)
that knocked out European air travel for a little over a week. I bet there’s a
cost-benefit study, somewhere, based on that event, that assesses the impact
on Europe’s GDP versus the difficulty of an artificial ash cloud and the
possibility of performing it with plausible deniability.

Technology is its own thing which I won’t even go into. But there was that
weird period in 2019 where, [in short
order](%20https://twitter.com/genmon/status/1151150982581145601?s=21), there
were major outages at Google/Google Cloud, Apple, Facebook, Cloudflare,
Stripe, Slack, Twitter, and Galileo (the European GPS equivalent with
satellite network and ground stations) was down for 4 days. It felt like a
systems test, or the cyber equivalent of running “exercises.”

So I wonder how much of this is already happening. Or at least, how much
already exists in the form of planning – perhaps we’re even now in the middle
of World War V(irtual), lasting tens of years already, with project plans and
not ICBMs being lobbed across the planet, nothing ever enacted but an
intricate standoff of exchanged complex system exploit threats.

I know this gets into proper tinfoil hat territory, and I honestly don’t know
why I devote so many of my clock cycles to thinking about it.
