# Facebook should make a camera

Companies I would start if only I had the time, #3 in a series
([previously,](http://interconnected.org/home/2012/05/22/instagram_for_webpages)
[previously](http://interconnected.org/home/2012/05/16/fuelband_for_alpha_waves)):

**I would make a Facebook Camera for the explicit purpose of getting acquired
by Facebook.**

Facebook have announced they’re going [mobile
first.](http://allthingsd.com/20120702/mobile-first-product-chief-chris-cox-
and-facebook-brass-make-the-phone-a-top-priority/) They need to: half
Facebook’s traffic comes from mobile rather than PC, but mobile traffic "does
not currently directly generate any meaningful revenue."

There are lots of rumours about Facebook working on a phone.

They shouldn’t make a phone. They should make a camera.

The Facebook Camera should be a better pocket camera, with native Facebook and
re-imagined for sharing, plus core communications functionality. It should
have wifi and optionally 3G.

The camera is a “second device” which lives alongside the phone and doesn’t
compete with it. This sidesteps Facebook around the highly competitive (and
increasingly locked-in) space of iPhone and Android, and avoids the need to
launch with a full app store.

Facebook are interested in camera apps (they have two: their own, and
Instagram). They should make the hardware.

**A better pocket camera:**

_The viewfinder screen should be front-facing, on the same face of the camera
as the lens._

Social photos aren’t like what I’ll call “posterity” photos. They’re not
portraits and landscapes. Social photos include the photographer in the
picture – you hold the camera out, and point it back at you and your friends.
Or you point it at the view behind you and include yourself in the frame, to
prove you’re there. A front-facing viewfinder would be perfect for this, and
it would also make the physical product visually distinctive when shown in
adverts and magazines (“self-evident” product design is essential for
marketing).

**Native sharing:**

Sharing happens in real life too. One usage of digital cameras I saw - before
the iPhone came along - was that a few photos would be kept, undeleted, on the
memory card, usually of cats, kids and significant others. These photos are
for showing off.

There should be a dedicated “photo wallet” Facebook album, and the front-
facing screen should be used for a dedicated showing off function.

**A “core communications” device:**

Although I see the Facebook Camera as a second device, alongside the phone,
this networked device should support all core communications:

Given this list, I suspect the Facebook Camera would undermine many of the
reasons to carry a full-featured app phone.

Music isn’t required. Wearing your headphones is anti-social when you’re
hanging out with your friends.

If you want the killer feature… _Facebook should build on Facebook Chat to
support video, and make this camera a video chat device._ Hangouts (easy,
social video chat) is the stand-out amazing feature in Google+, and Facebook
should be looking to compete.

**Product design:**

The Facebook Camera should have accessible product design which is cool
without being weird (the Nokia Lumia does this well), mass market without
being tacky (the Kindle does this well), and distinctive without being bizarre
(think of the original iPod). It’s got to look like a camera crossed with an
iPod Touch with your friends inside.

It makes sense to make hardware, because physical products are high
engagement.

Facebook’s model (as I understand it) is to record every single action every
person takes, with metadata of time, place, and location in the social graph.
This substrate, and the tools to manipulate it, has a good chance of being the
underlying foundation of whatever it is comes after the Web. The Web started
as a document repository, it’s all about nouns. Facebook has the potential to
be as big, but all about verbs. The “social network” aspect of Facebook is
part of its bootstrap: the way Facebook gets into the position that it’s
natural that all verbs run through it. The next step in the bootstrap, to move
down into the foundations, is that Facebook will become a platform for other
social networks. Instagram is the first major one.

Any drop in engagement in the social network (for example what happened to
Digg or MySpace) risks this entire future.

As a defensive play, a mobile device is essential. Facebook’s mobile usage is
increasing, but they can’t make any money out of ads on mobile. So they’re in
a desparate double bind: So long as Facebook on mobile is popular but not
commercially useful, it’s good for mobile operators and OS providers because
it boosts service usage, but it’s bad for Facebook because it cannabalises
desktop usage.

But when their mobile service is popular and becomes commercially viable, the
mobile operators and OS providers become conflicted gatekeepers who will
either undermine the ad experience or get a piece of it themselves by
undermining Facebook as a whole. We’re seeing signs of this already. Half of
the mobile market is owned by Android, made by Google, who also make Google+,
which means Android will threaten Facebook.

The way to escape this trap is for Facebook to make a mobile device.

The phone market is really, really contested, and really, really hard. Phones
are the centrepiece of Apple, the most valuable and most inventive company on
the planet. Phones are the focus of Google, the Web’s most inventive company,
and a fierce and increasingly motivated competitor. Both Apple and Google have
been working hard on lock-in for one or more OS generations. Phones are the
one of the points of both attack and defence from the previous generation’s
largest technology firm, Microsoft. Phones are where one of the largest
technology companies there is - Samsung - can just about keep up. Phones are
the rocks on which the biggest of the big technology players have come
unstuck: Nokia and RIM.

To have a phone now, you need the phone, a sufficiently incredible offer to
get customers to break with phones they love (most of those people are in
18-24 month contracts), a whole app and developer ecosystem, hardware
manufacturing and distribution, access to the network, access to a media
content system, access to a physical media playback system, and to be
butressed by a multi-device ecosystem like tablets or music players.

Facebook could enter this market, sure, but why bet the business on winning in
such a competitive space?

Here’s the thing: You don’t need to make a phone to make it in mobile.

Five years ago, the iPhone was released into a world of desktop PCs and bulky
laptops. Laptops were never truly mobile devices, and the iPhone (and Android)
made a lot of sense in that world, over the previous generation of smartphones
from Nokia and RIM. “App phones” were more like mini computers.

The product landscape has changed. The iPad is phenomonally successful, and
other tablets look pretty neat too. The trend with laptops is towards
ultrabooks, where the MacBook Air is setting the pace – the Air is almost
instant on, super light, and has an incredible battery life. It’s way more
mobile than any previous laptop. Alongside these product shifts, the cloud has
emerged as the home of data. When I lost my laptop recently, configuring a new
laptop was as simple as signing into iTunes, Dropbox, and GMail.

In this world of iPads and (hopefully) upcoming tablets, does the bells-and-
whistles approach of iPhone and Android make as much sense? I don’t think so.
I think a new, simple category of pocket devices opens up. It’s not going to
be another music device, those have vacated the pocket. It might be a gaming
device, but the iPhone has grabbed that niche.

But it could be a camera.

A camera that also dealt with core communications (email, chat, maps,
Facebook) would meet some of the same needs as a phone without competing with
phones directly.

Cameras are both highly personal and highly popular, like music players were
when Apple launched the iPod. That’s a good place to be. It’s full of love.

And cameras fit right in with Facebook’s position at the world biggest online
photo service (in 2010, Facebook had [2.5 billion photos uploaded every
month](https://blog.facebook.com/blog.php?post=206178097130)), just as the
iPod fit with Apple’s position in the music sector with iTunes.

Last, the camera sector is ripe for re-invention and new features.

The bottom end of the market has been softened up: the iPhone has replaced the
compact camera as most people’s camera of choice. But it doesn’t take great
photos, and it’s okay but not particularly good at letting you share and
socialise around photos. So the iPhone has not protected its position as a
compact. And although the former compact sector has been adding features like
crazy - smile detection, wifi uploads - none of the device manufactures really
get software or social networks.

On the high end, the professional cameras have turned into excellent prosumer
models – which is neat, but they’re definitely not social: they’re portrait
and landscape cameras. You can see a few manufacturers attempting to innovate:
Nokia have their 41 megapixel camera, Polaroid have launched a digital camera,
Sony have their compact DSCL, there’s Lytro and their lightfield camera, and
Samsung have actually launched cameras with front-facing screens, etc. But
nothing has traction.

Facebook is breaking up their mobile app into lots of different apps for
particular functions, which is what I’d expect if they were going to launch
their own device: they’d want Facebook features to be top-level features on
whatever that new device was, and creating them in HTML (the language of the
Web) on iPhones means they can re-use these apps still in HTML on whatever
their hypothetical new device is.

They obviously care about cameras: the single app that doesn’t parallel a
feature on the Web is a dedicated camera app. And then there’s Instagram,
which is Facebook’s _second_ camera app.

If I was Facebook, I’d be getting ready for a hypothetical future device by
preparing all my functionality to make the jump. Currently Facebook are
breaking up their single iPhone app into [lots of little
microapps.](http://www.avc.com/a_vc/2012/07/mobile-is-where-the-growth-
is.html) Makes sense. Then I’d talk to Sony for the manufacturing.

But I’m not Facebook. So I’d either do a start-up with a hardware accelerator
(equity is exchanged for contract manufacturing), or I’d prototype and then
pitch to joint venture with Facebook itself.

The thing is, the nature of products is changing. It doesn’t make sense to
think of cameras as straight-up-and-down products – you have you consider what
a camera is as a service, and what it is as media. That is: how does the
camera meet the service offering of “taking and sharing photos” as easily and
wonderfully as possible? And how does the camera let photos take their place
as objects in the communication and entertainment media of social networks?
The industrial design is almost secondary.

And traditional product companies - even Apple to an extent - don’t think like
this. Web companies do, but so far hardware has been out of their reach. Until
Web companies figure out how to do hardware, there’s going to be an
interesting gap to fill.
