# Fanboost and other magical manifestations of the will

Formula E (the electric version of Formula 1) has
[FANBOOST](https://www.fiaformulae.com/en/championship/fanboost) which is
maybe the tech equivalent of some kind of distributed good fortune magick?

The five drivers who receive the highly-acclaimed FANBOOST – as voted for by
you, the fans - are awarded a significant burst of power, which they can
deploy in a five-second window during the second half of the race.

You vote on the website, or by invoking the drivers name on Twitter as a
hashtag.

I am obsessed with this idea.

Because it is obviously bonkers. It’s action-at-a-distance, which is weird.
Concretely, it breaks the rules of the game, because why can’t a car use its
battery as it chooses.

And yet it makes intuitive sense?

Like _of course_ if a million people WILL the car to go faster, it should go
faster? Deep down, I think that’s what humans believe.

And then, in football: what is the _home advantage_ except for fanboost by
sheer weight of numbers?

It’s definitely to do with people. As discovered in lockdown, [home advantage
disappears in empty stadiums](https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/05/as-
football-returns-in-empty-stadiums-four-graphs-shows-how-home-advantage-
disappears/): "We have found that the considerable home advantage in football
is on average almost entirely wiped out in closed doors matches."

I posted yesterday about [isoprene in the breath](/home/2020/09/15/isoprene)
as a person-to-person stress transmitter.

Monique van Dusseldorp on Twitter [thought about
conferences](https://twitter.com/dusseldorp/status/1306120167399862272?s=21):
" Having been in conference rooms for 30 years - on stage, backstage, in the
room - I thought it was heartbeats falling into step that make you “feel” the
audience. Matt Webb pulls together some info that is completely new to me and
makes total sense. Breath."

And I know EXACTLY what she’s talking about. Speaking to an audience of 1,000
people, when I get in sync I disassociate – I feel like I lift up and my words
are the exact right ones, the _only_ ones for that moment.

So if you’re a speaker at a rally of _thousands_ of people, all yelling and
therefore projecting their breath right at you, and you pick up the mood and
rile them right back, a positive feedback loop of accumulating isoprene –
well, you can see how those rallies in the 1940s got so elevated.

And football matches: a stadium of 60,000 directing their isoprene right at
the players?

What gets me still is FANBOOST.

Virtual isoprene.

I wonder if this kind of idea could help in group video calls?

Say, monitor the gaze of all participants, add it all up, and give everyone an
individual, dynamic attention rank.

People with high rank should magically find it easier to get into the
conversation; their noise cancelling threshold is set to let them speak a few
milliseconds quicker, that kind of thing, or their volume is set slightly
higher.

Dunno.

_I’m sure I’ve got some friends who know about magick and have talked to me
about this kind of stuff before. Anything I should read? Feels like some
strong inspiration in this area._

Prayer.

I’m reminded of a paper I read [way back in 2002](/home/2002/02/20/okay) (that
link is my blog post at the time). It was printed in a paranormal special
edition of the _British Medical Journal._

Let’s put replicability aside for a second. Here’s the punchline, from the
abstract linked from that post.

Remote intercessory prayer said for a group of patients is associated with a
shorter hospital stay and shorter duration of fever in patients with a
bloodstream infection, even when the intervention is performed 4–10 years
after the infection

Remote prayer. PRAYERBOOST.

_Retroactive._ Better outcomes, even 4–10 years _after_ the patient leaves
hospital. Wh-wh-what?
