# The shock and awe of state-sponsored women’s fashion

I think that, because we’re a capitalist society, we think of AIs as
amplifiers for production and consumption. But they can force-multiply on any
vector if suitably directed.

And, I don’t know, could you weaponise the fearsome AI that is the Gen Z
fashion app Shein?

Look:

Back in 2017, Anna Batista asked (at _Irenebrination):_ [Can the Algorithm
Become a Cool Fashion
Designer?](https://irenebrination.typepad.com/irenebrination_notes_on_a/2017/08/amazon-
algorithm-fashion-designer.html)

Developed by Amazon’s San Francisco-based Lab126 - the company’s research and
development hub - the algorithm uses a tool called generative adversarial
network (GAN). … In a nutshell, the algorithm may spot a trend on Instagram,
Pinterest, Facebook, or in its own collection images generated by Amazon’s
Echo Look camera, and come up with new styles.

AI fashion.

A GAN is actually _two_ AIs, a generator and a discriminator.

The generator sits there pumping out new dresses (or whatever). The
discriminator does its best to recognises the dresses (or whatever) and score
them. The generator learns how to improve its score. Ta-da, amazing dresses.

Though I don’t recall it taking over Amazon.

_5 YEARS LATER:_

Based in China and shipping across 220 countries, [Shein is the world’s
largest fashion retailer](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shein_(company)>), as
of 2022 _(Wikipedia)._

**The generator:**

It starts with algorithmically scouring the internet and Shein’s own data to
pull out fashion trends. As one of Google’s largest China-based customers,
Shein has access to Google’s Trend Finder product, which allows for real-time
granular tracking of clothing related search terms across various countries.
This allowed Shein, for example, to accurately predict the popularity of lace
in America during the summer of 2018. Combine that with Shein’s huge volume of
1st party data through its app from around the globe and software-human teams
that scour competitors’ sites, and Shein understands what clothes consumers
want now better than anyone with the possible exception of Amazon.

Shein feeds that data to its massive in-house design and prototyping team who
can get a product from drawing board to production and live-online in as
little as three-days.

From there, "it can start with incredibly small batches, around as small as 10
items."

_(Go read that entire breakdown of Shein’s business. The ERP innovation is
remarkable.)_

**The discriminator:**

Products in very small numbers are added to the app, and then clicks, views,
purchases, and shares are monitored - automatically scaling orders to the
network of factories. At great scale.

Shein churns out and tests thousands of different items simultaneously.
Between July and December of 2021, _it added anywhere between 2,000 and 10,000
individual styles to its app each day_ , according to data collected in the
course of Rest of World’s investigations. The company confirmed that it starts
by ordering a small batch of each garment, often a few dozen pieces, and then
waits to see how buyers respond. If the cropped sweater vest is a hit, Shein
orders more. It calls the system a “large-scale automated test and re-order
(LATR) model”.

I mean.

While the bit of Shein that surfaces trends makes use of AI, it isn’t an AI
designer in itself (the team of human designers was [already 800 strong by
2016](https://kr-asia.com/decoding-shein-growing-pains-and-bitter-splits-
part-2-of-3)).

But throw _consumerism_ into the loop, with feedback into ordering, and the
entire thing resembles a giant Generative Adversarial Network, an AI for
producing fashion lashed together out of software, supply chains, designers,
and desire, teaching itself how to improve all the time.

Likewise I wouldn’t call the Facebook newsfeed algorithm an AI, but coupled
with user clicks and eyeballs as a discriminator, I most definitely would. The
trick is to include the human response.

(If we could talk to the Shein AI, I wonder what it would say? It would be
like trying to talk to an intelligence emergent from the fluid dynamical
storms of Jupiter. I wonder how we could send it a message, and if we would
recognise any response?)

It’s tempting to think of this giant fashion GAN as _neutral_ somehow. Like:
it generates, we discriminate, and what comes out is fashion.

But it’s trivially possible to reach inside the machine. The prince of Shein
could decide that everyone is going to wear blue next month, and could choose
to only generate blue garments, and of course the thresher of consumerism can
only discriminate over what it’s given…

So at that point the AI would grasp the flywheel, and blindly optimise its way
to figuring out exactly _how_ to make blue garments appealing and profitable.

I mean, AI is a fearsomely powerful gradient climber. It’s a weapon.

And it occurs to me that:

I’m not picking on China especially here or suggesting they are actually up to
anything or would have a motivation to do so, but this combination of
appearance mediators makes me ask:

**What would a state-sponsored fashion hack look like?**

A fashion hack isn’t like the other global infrastructure exploits [I’ve
previously wondered about](/home/2021/03/25/exploits) because it isn’t
entirely obvious what you’d use it for. But the thing about state-sponsored
attacks is that they’re a bit like magic tricks: they operate at a scale which
is absurd, which makes them unimaginable, and that’s why they work. Like
artificial weather or guided influenza.

It’s absurd to contemplate that plausibly deniable rainstorms might be
directed to disrupt a UN weapons inspection team, or people peaking on the
infectivity curve with flu are quietly standing next to diplomats 48 hours
ahead of an important negotiation - but I bet it has happened.

Could a malevolent state actor

Dunno.

Hey, follow-up question: if we _were_ in the middle of a giant fashion hack,
how would we know?

If I got to pull the levers, I’d use Shein and TikTok to target my own
civilians, and I would artificially boost acceptance and desire for
cybernetically enhanced clothing, catalysing an arms race for [cyborg
prostheses](/home/2020/04/07/cyborg_prosthetics) providing the wearer with
both superhuman powers (such as strength, speed, and musical accomplishment)
and astounding aesthetics.

But that’s just me.
