# Filtered for small groups

[James Mulholland has been investigating the small
group:](https://jmulholland.com/small-group/)

Lying somewhere between a club and a loosely defined set of friends, the SMALL
GROUP is a repeated theme in the lives of the successful. Benjamin Franklin
had the Junto Club, Tolkien and C.S. Lewis had The Inklings, Jobs and Wozniak
had Homebrew. The Bloomsbury Group was integral to the success of Virginia
Woolf, Clive Bell, and John Maynard Keynes, while MIT’s Model Railroad Club
spawned much of modern hacker culture.

It’s a crucible for exploration and creation… but this isn’t a team on working
on a single project together. It’s about independent work and feedback. Says
Mulholland: "An ongoing relationship provides more effective advice, allowing
the use of shorthand for concepts and a two-way conversation that autodidactic
education lacks."

He asks: "What is the SMALL GROUP for the 2020s?" – and gives some boundaries:
around a dozen members; mutual accountability on personal projects through
regular presentations.

It’s a powerfully engaging question.

Here’s Kevin Kelly on Brian Eno’s concept of [Scenius, or Communal
Genius](https://kk.org/thetechnium/scenius-or-comm/): "Scenius stands for the
intelligence and the intuition of a whole cultural scene. It is the communal
form of the concept of the genius."

Kelly lists some success factors:

Kelly is, as ever, _incredibly smart._ And goodness, I recognise those factors
from various communities and even small and big companies.

To use slightly different terms, mutual appreciation is a healthy _jealousy
without envy_ – a drive to achieve the same but without wanting to take it
from the other.

That feeds the mutualisation of success, which becomes a kind of _co-
marketing:_ a rising tide lifts all ships.

And the rapid exchange of tools requires two things: highly efficient
communication (openness and forums to be open in); and a non-proprietorial
attitude to tools and ideas because _execution is what matters._

LOS ANGELES – Hype House, the physical location of a new content creator
collective, is a Spanish-style mansion perched at the top of a hill on a gated
street in Los Angeles. It has a palatial backyard, a pool and enormous
kitchen, dining and living quarters.

Four of the group’s 19 members live in the house full time; several others
keep rooms to crash in when they are in town.

That’s from **The New York Times,** [Hype House and the Los Angeles TikTok
Mansion Gold Rush](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/03/style/hype-house-los-
angeles-tik-tok.html).

More:

So-called collab houses, also known as content houses, are an established
tradition in the influencer world. Over the last five years they have formed a
network of hubs across Los Angeles.

And some detail:

Manufactured scenius.

Clay Shirky’s classic essay from 2005, [A Group Is Its Own Worst
Enemy](https://www.gwern.net/docs/technology/2005-shirky-
agroupisitsownworstenemy.pdf) (pdf), on **software for groups.**

Shirky channels the psychoanalyst **Wilfred Bion** who specialised in groups
in the mid 20th century.

Bion’s realisation was that social groups have _their own mentality,_ a kind
of mind which is connected to but also separate from the individuals.

Bion then goes on to detail **three basic assumptions** that the group
mentality can fall into (as fundamental as any of the mental states like
exuberance or fight-or-flight that we can fall into an individuals).

Shirky’s words:

What a successful group does (says Bion) is weave together these three basic
assumptions so that they’re no longer dysfunctions (which is what each becomes
if left to dominate) but instead providing a foundation for productive
**work.**

Shirky brings Bion’s work to life. It’s an essay very, very much worth a
read/re-read (delete as appropriate).

Bonus link: my own stream of consciousness 2015 essay, [Small groups and
consultancy and coffee
mornings](/home/2015/10/07/small_groups_and_consultancy).

I find myself circling these topics, and thinking about technology and its
role and how we’ve really screwed that up, and about Bion and his wonderfully
emotional approach to groups, and asking the same question that James
Mulholland asked at the top of this post: "What is the SMALL GROUP for the
2020s?"
