# Filtered for some text-based virtual realities

Cait Kirby’s [September 7th,
2020](https://caitkirby.com/downloads/Fall%202020.html) is a playable webpage.

It’s a short and powerful story:

You are a sophomore at Most Distinguished University of the North. You are a
biology major and very excited about your genetics class this fall. …

You wanted to take all your classes online. _Instead, this is your day._

You click, the story unfolds. There are a few choices along the way.

Ultimately it’s an argument that, in the midst of Covid-19, university classes
should be online.

Could this have been an op-ed, or a blog post? Yes. But instead it’s a self-
contained text experience, almost a mini environment, and all the more
transporting and empathy-building for that fact. It’s like that line from the
old BBC broadcaster Alistair Cooke: "I prefer radio to TV because the pictures
are better."

_It looks like this was written in[Twine](http://twinery.org), which is a
graphical app to author interactive, nonlinear stories. Then published with
[Sugarcube](http://www.motoslave.net/sugarcube/2/) which is a web-based
“player” for Twine stories, originally based off a wiki interface which
explains why it feels so much like a hypertext. Here’s a great tutorial on
using the two together: [How to use Twine and SugarCube to create interactive
adventure games](https://opensource.com/article/18/2/twine-gaming)._

Parabolic House is an immersive theatre company, and their latest production
is [The House of Cenci](https://www.parabolictheatre.com/the-house-of-
cenci-1): "Integrating a free-roaming text adventure with live performance on
Zoom across four weeks."

**[You can play The House of Cenci text adventure
here.](https://www.parabolictheatre.com/the-house-of-cenci-hidden)**

Again it’s a playable webpage _(possibly using Twine?),_ and it seems to sit
halfway between interactive fiction (you tap the words to unfold the story)
and an environment (you move between rooms and pick up objects).

I like the way the description of each room expands telescopically, and then
the screen resets when you move.

**The Impossible Bottle** by Linus Åkesson was joint winner of the 2020
Interactive Fiction competition (its 26th year!).

It is charming, gently puzzling, and beautifully described. Gorgeous.

Because _The Impossible Bottle_ follows text adventure tropes (i.e. you go
_east, north, up,_ etc), it feels very much like exploring a real place – it’s
definitely less like a story and more like immersive theatre. A text-based
single-player virtual reality.

When I play text adventures, the image that always comes into my head is
Superman’s [Bottle City of Kandor](https://superman.fandom.com/wiki/Kandor):
"Kandor served as Krypton’s capital and main cultural center." BUT! An alien
starship arrived and "enveloped Kandor in a force field and some sort of
shrinking ray."

And now Superman has, at his Fortress of Solitude, this whole tiny city with
all these tiny inhabitants going about their tiny business, kept in a bottle
on the shelf.

So I enjoy dropping into these bottle cities, and particularly I like it when
they’re not too overwhelming and I can play on my phone.

_Åkesson used a self-authored game engine for this work:[The
Å-machine](https://linusakesson.net/dialog/aamachine/). A more accessible app
to author these kind of environment-based text adventures might be [Inform
7](http://inform7.com) which feels a bit like writing a narrative, but can
also output to a playable webpage._

Tully Hansen’s [Writing](http://overland.org.au/media/writing/) is an
unfolding/flowering text/poem/meditation about, well, writing. It starts with
one word.

Give it a go, it’s wonderful. The experience of reading this semi-branching,
semi-guided text is a little bit like having meandering thoughts yourself - I
do wonder what [David Markson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Markson)
would have done with this - but the fact your thumbs are engaged too makers it
new. It has good… tap-feel? Can that be a word now?

_(Written using[telescopictext.org](http://www.telescopictext.org) which is a
tool for creating such things.)_

SEE ALSO:

Robin Sloan’s seminal [Fish: a tap essay](https://www.robinsloan.com/fish/),
which is "an experiment in a new format: a ‘tap essay,’ presenting its
argument tap by tap, making its case with typography, color, and a few
surprises."

_(And I saw Sloan mention[on
Twitter](https://twitter.com/robinsloan/status/1363895970589675523?s=20) the
other day that he has a new framework for tap essays in the works, based on
the open-source-and-just-released [ink scripting
environment](https://www.inklestudios.com/2021/02/22/ink-version-1.html) for
interactive narrative. Another authoring environment to experiment with!)_

I think what I like about these experiments in new formats is that they’re
like the text equivalent of _tape cassettes_ if you remember those. Somebody
would pass you a cassette at school, and you’d take it home, and lie on your
carpet in your room next to the tape machine, and hit play, and just be
transported for 30 minutes, music in your ears and the pictures in your head.
If you could take _that_ experience and bottle it… Well.

p.s. If you know of more self-contained, text-based virtual realities,
particularly experiments with new formats, please send them my way. I’m
interested.

BONUS LINK:

Check out the newsletter [50 Years of Text Games](https://if50.substack.com).

“50 Years of Text Games” is a project that traces a path through the history
of digital games without graphics, by picking one game from each year between
1971 to 2021 and taking an in-depth look at how it works and why it’s
important.

1971 is the pre-history of text games, so start right at the beginning and
you’ll read how computer games came about and why, and how they spread using
nascent computer networks, and how the idea of selling them in plastic bags
had to be invented too, and… well, it’s great. It’s up to 1978 right now
(going at one year a week), so there’s a good way to go yet. I recommend you
subscribe.
