# Filtered for big things that don’t weigh so much

The entire internet, i.e. all the electrons in all the electricity: [about 50
grams, the same as a plump strawberry](https://futurism.com/the-world-
contained-in-a-strawberry-2).

A gossamer lacework, as light as a strawberry, covering the world.

The entire atmosphere of the Moon: [less than 10 metric
tonnes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atmosphere_of_the_Moon).

c.f. Earth’s atmosphere which is about [5.15 million
gigatons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atmosphere_of_Earth).

c.f. Earth’s living biomass: just 2% of the weight of the atmosphere, 1,100
gigatons. But humans make a lot of mass too; anthropogenic mass doubles every
20 years. It turns out that we’re at the crossover point and, as of 2020:
[Global human-made mass exceeds all living
biomass](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-3010-5).

The total volume of Covid-19 (SARS-CoV-2) in the whole world: [about 160
milliliters](https://theconversation.com/all-the-coronavirus-in-the-world-
could-fit-inside-a-coke-can-with-plenty-of-room-to-spare-154226), roughly 6
shot glasses.

The human soul:

In 1901, Duncan MacDougall, a physician from Haverhill, Massachusetts, who
wished to scientifically determine if a soul had weight, identified six
patients in nursing homes whose deaths were imminent. … When the patients
looked like they were close to death, their entire bed was placed on an
industrial sized scale that was sensitive within two tenths of an ounce.

MacDougall measured the patients’ loss of mass at the very moment of death,
when the soul departs the body. The result and therefore the weight of the
soul: [21 grams](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/21_grams_experiment).

The experiment was repeated with dogs, and found _no_ weight change,
confirming the theory that animals do not have souls. Sadly: "MacDougall said
he wished to use dogs that were sick or dying for his experiment, though was
unable to find any. It is therefore presumed he poisoned healthy dogs."

The Moon’s atmosphere weighs 200,000 internets. One internet is 2.4 human
souls.

Science!
