# An overly complex hack for finding books on cluttered shelves

I have a ton of books. I can never find the one I’m looking for. Here’s an
idea.

Quick backstory first. I use books to think – if I’m writing, I pull a half
dozen relevant books (topic, tangents, tone) and stack them next to me on the
sofa. I may never consult them, but they influence me via some radiative field
in the noosphere.

(I asked friend and cognitive scientist Tom Stafford about why this was, and
[he said](https://twitter.com/tomstafford/status/1286542919214739456) "you
gotta prime the latent conceptual space your thoughts move around." And THEN
he said: "related: did you know that the UK population is, on average,
slightly slower to pronounce the word “breakfast” since it acquired a novel
word neighbour in the last few years (“brexit”)?" – so, whoa.)

BACK TO BOOKS.

One of the pleasures of having many books is shelving. Fiction is to my left.
On my right is non-fiction, and here is my system, with topics varying in size
from maybe only a quarter of a shelf to, well, four shelves.

And, you know what, that is mostly enough to find any book that I care to look
for.

And _also_ \- and this is the critical quality of any good shelving system in
my opinion - loose enough such that, when I’m looking for a book, happy
serendipity will lead me other related titles that I had temporarily
forgotten, but that will then become vital.

BUT: sometimes I can’t find a book.

_SOLUTION TIME:_

There’s an iPhone app called [Memos](https://memos.org): "A private search
engine for your photos and screenshots."

It indexes my entire photo library, _without any of the photos leaving my
device,_ and makes it searchable. I can open the app, type in a word, and see
photos of newspapers and menus, screenshots of apps and emails, receipts and
the rest – it’s wicked fast.

My regular use case: I take a picture of a page in a book, open Memos, then
immediately copy and paste the words. But I also take pictures of instruction
manuals, and notices and signs I see in my neighbourhood. All searchable. It’s
wonderful.

It occurs to me that I could

AND SO:

Shouldn’t this be built in?

I would love a button labeled _“Index Your Room”_ and, on pressing it, it
would simply prompt me to wave my phone around, and do optical character
recognition on everything it sees, and additionally remember how all the
images stick together and where they are.

Then months later, when I say to my phone _Hey where did I put ‘The Elements
of Typographic Style’?_ (earlier this week, I couldn’t remember whether it was
under Reference, On Writing, or - out of an abundance of confusion at the time
of categorisation - Misc), I would then hold my phone up to my shelves, and it
would draw an arrow over the live camera view to navigate me to the correct
location of the spine. _Cold… warmer… warmer… hot… getting there… there it
is._

I can use Memos in the meantime I guess.

But yeah please build that, it would be great thanks.
