# Lessons on finding flow

_The following written using[The Most Dangerous Writing
App](http://www.themostdangerouswritingapp.com) which deletes everything
unless you type continuously for 5 minutes, on 29 February 2016 at 19:05. You
get 5 seconds grace. Discoveries are made. Output follows._

This reminds me of that game on Radio 4 where you have to speak continuously
for one minute, with no hesitation, deviation, or repetition. Except here I
don’t this repetition matters. It’s all about not stopping.

Which means maybe it’s more like the movie Speed with Keanu Reeves where he
couldn’t slow the bus down below whatever it was, 40 mph, or otherwise it
would blow up.

Explode.

Go bang.

Or maybe, it occurs to me, it’s more like that neuroscience experiment where
you try to say as many difficult challenges as possible for a whole minute.
And the effort of that results in more blood flow to the brain, and because
that’s already a large amount of your oxygen usage anyway, that’s detectable,
and your head should be warmer, or you end up breathing faster, or something
like that.

I don’t remember.

The weird thing with this experiment is that it’s not the paragraphs that are
hard to figure out. I have enough time while I’m typing to choose something
that comes next.

No. The problem is this:

It’s when I get halfway through a sentence and I don’t know exactly how to
phrase what I way to say. So I usually pause for a second, delete, choose a
different word. Or pause for longer, and in that gap go back and want to
revise the previous sentence.

Which breaks my flow state. When I get lost in a particular word - a stutter
if you like - I stop being able to think of what’s happening in the next
paragraph.

I feel that there’s a lesson here in how I write usually.

Notes, discovered at this point 4 minutes in, that I need to remember for
later, about how to write more fluently without using this app:

I’ve got to 5 minutes now, which is the stopping point, and already I found I
have revised this sentence by deleting its second clause; I have gone back and
added point 3 above which wasn’t there before; I am pausing slightly to second
guess myself.

So, lessons. Time to stop.

Looking back on what I wrote a week ago, I boil it down to this:

Writing and editing are separate tasks, and I should approach in different
ways and at different times.

I was only able to see this after finding flow for, what, four minutes. And
this category of ideas that are only visible after some period of time, or
some kind of journey… this is interesting to me.

I’ve been reading about [scoring centuries in
cricket](http://machine.supply/books/genmon/149) and there’s something
resonant for me in those stories about getting to the magic 100: An individual
game, every ball the same as the last but somehow not; a score made run by
run. Don’t think about the 100 when you start, just start. Every ball on its
merits. Even the greats remind themselves to watch the ball every time one is
bowled. You can’t score runs from the pavilion.
