# Post at 18.55, on Thursday 17 Mar 2011

[The Long Now Foundation](http://longnow.org/ "Homepage.") "was established in
01996 to creatively foster long-term thinking and responsibility in the
framework of the next 10,000 years."

Sticking a zero at the beginning of the year is ace. They're [building a
clock](http://longnow.org/clock/ "Clock page.") that'll last those 10,000
years. Two lovely interventions in culture! Yum.

They recently asked on their blog, [Peak
Science?](http://blog.longnow.org/2011/03/01/peak-science/ "Long Now blog
post.") First they point out a trend, identified by Samuel Arbesman (Harvard
Medical School): "By measuring the average size of discovered asteroids,
mammalian species and chemical elements, he was able to show that, over the
last few hundred years, these three very different scientific fields have been
obeying the exact same trend: the size of what they discover has been getting
smaller."

And follow it with this speculation: "_we've basically picked all the low-
hanging fruit of scientific discovery_ \-- all Galileo had to do was be the
first person to look at Jupiter through a telescope and he discovered four
moons. But, we've found all the moons now, and without those easy to reach
facts, weâ€™re now forced to pool more effort and resources into learning new
things."

Interesting! But I disagree.

The kinds of science mentioned are what [Deleuze and Guattari call "royal
science"](http://books.google.com/books?id=B9xLrS6mpGoC&pg=PA405&lpg=PA405&dq=%22royal+science%22+deleuze+guattari&source=bl&ots=j38rjywFCR&sig=E0jN8pWpSQR6jaqOum7Y5xFlP5U&hl=en&ei=C1KCTdn6OIiEhQeOz9HEBA&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=3&ved=0CCYQ6AEwAg#v=snippet&q=%22royal%20science%22&f=false "Google Books search results in A Thousand Plateaus for 'royal science'.") \--
it's the science you get taught at school where the discipline is given
capital letters: Physics, Chemistry, Computer Science. It's the science where
there are institutions, journals, funding, prizes, PhDs, and a division
between those who are Scientists and the rest of society. It's the science you
can get a qualification in, and the science you can fail in.

It happens that sciences start their lives somewhat differently -- biology
emerged from hobbyist Victorian men and women first collecting, and then
taxonomising animals and plants. Electricity was a hobbyist's occupation
before it was formalised: the same journal would speak about a lecture, a new
patent, an experiment with lightbulbs, and who had been hit by lightning that
month. Sciences don't look like sciences to begin with. You can't "fail" in
collecting examples of finches.

So, my first question: (1) where are the hobbies?

Of course, the [Large Hadron Collider](http://lhc.web.cern.ch/lhc/ "Physicists
give things lovely names.") at CERN, that particle accelerator loop 27
kilometres around, can't be a hobby -- it's too big and too expensive. But
it's at the [final "white dwarf"
end](http://abyss.uoregon.edu/~js/ast122/lectures/lec17.html "That is, at the
end of its stellar evolution.") of scientific evolution. It's way past its
lively period of heady, explosive growth and illumination. Science goes
through stages: first you collect (write down many examples), then you have a
period of making taxonomies and hypotheses (a period of crazy invention and
fights and predictions), and then you settle on a reductionist model and (a)
the science turns into technology (lasers and CD players), and (b) you look
for experiments to disrupt the model to start over again (CERN).

I simplify. But, y'know.

Collecting is easy. But it's not really seen as science (though it's
essential). It's a an incidental activity, or a hobby, often by people who are
fans of science, or philosophy, or some other similar discipline preoccupied
with causality and structure (where it is also accompanied by cataloging and
rule-making).

So my second question is (2) where are people collecting?

Answer my two questions, and we'll find new _proto-sciences,_ science
nurseries full of low-hanging fruit.

And here are some examples that pop immediately to mind:

There are a billion low hanging fruits. We don't recognise these worlds as
capital-S Science because they're not what we've been taught to see. Get out
your telescope that you don't recognise as a telescope, and you'll see moons
and Jupiters that have never before been spied.
