# Don’t keep your eye on the ball but prime your intuition

I watch a bunch of cricket (and read about it too). I ran across a
counterintuitive method which is to _not_ keep your eye on the ball. It turns
out this is how elite batters operate, and it has made me think about the way
I structure my own work.

Greg Chappell has the idea that there are ascending levels of concentration,
with the peak, _“fierce focus”,_ being a state that has a max budget over the
day.

Chappell is one of the cricketing greats, a hugely successful Australian
batter from the 1970s known for big scores.

His origin story: he was great _sometimes_ but other times just ok. Then he
received a letter that made him think about his game. In a meditative fugue,
sitting in the dark: "He thinks about every single game of cricket that he has
ever played, from his very first in the backyard with his brother Ian … to
Test cricket for Australia."

Then an epiphany:

Hours later - it is difficult for him to tell how many - he emerges with a
stunning realisation: by playing cricket since the age of four, he had,
without realising it, developed a systemic process of concentration and a
precise method of watching the ball; but he had only been using them
consistently on his good days.

Here is a deep dive into Greg Chappell’s method, and the psychology behind it:
**[What does a batsman
see?](https://www.thecricketmonthly.com/story/1136242/what-does-a-batsman-
see)** _(2018)_ by SB Tang in _The Cricket Monthly._

Brief cricket overview, because I’m a fan and you may not be.

Two teams. One team bats, aiming to hit as many balls as possible and build a
big score (runs). The other team bowls, aiming to get batters out (by catching
or knocking over the wicket behind the batter). Then the teams switch.

There are multiple formats of cricket. One is T20 which lasts 3.5 hours. Each
team bowls a fixed number of balls: 120 each. A second format is Test cricket
which lasts 5 days. The number of balls is unlimited and the batters stay
batting as long as they can. Greg Chappell played Test cricket.

Everything about life can be seen in Test cricket.

Bowlers run up and bowl the ball overarm, with a straight arm, 22 yards from
the batter. The ball bounces once, and the goal is to trick the batter so that
the ball leaps off their bat in an unintended way so it can be caught, or it
sneaks past them and smashes the wicket.

A cricket ball is leather, rock hard and the size of a tennis ball. For Test
cricket it is shiny and deep red. It has stitching which stands proud of the
ball.

The ball can be bowled at up to 90 mph, and spun up to 2,000 rpm. It swings in
the air and changes direction off the ground, both from its own motion, and
the position of the seam, and the quality of the ground where it bounces. Its
height, when it reaches the batter, is determined by where it bounces. All of
which is in control of the bowler.

So batting is hard.

Chappell’s key point: "mental energy is a finite resource that a batsman must
conserve if he is to achieve his ultimate objective of scoring as many runs as
possible, which will require him to spend hours, if not days, out in the
middle."

And:

Chappell realised that he had three ascending levels of mental concentration:
awareness, fine focus and fierce focus. In order to conserve his finite
quantum of mental energy, he would have to use fierce focus as little as
possible, so that it was always available when he really needed it.

After playing the ball, a deliberate step down in focus level: "Chappell
cycled his concentration back down to its minimum level of awareness."

(This resonates with me because attention is the feeling of our brain
allocating scarce realtime processing capacity, and it forms a kind of
attentional pyramid, [as previously discussed](/home/2021/09/21/playhead), but
I haven’t run across the pyramid being extended and described and _used_ in
such a way before.)

The rest of the article is _incredible,_ by the way, a real dive into the
science and psychology of what’s going on. Read the whole thing.

RELATED:

[Why You Should Care About
Cricket](http://www.espn.com/espn/eticket/story?page=110329/Cricket) _(2011)_
by Wright Thompson.

ESPN sent their baseball correspondent to India to cover the cricket World Cup
in 2011, without him knowing anything about it.

Back home, an Alabama fan had killed the trees at Toomer’s Corner, and I was
trying to explain the significance to him. This was big news to me. I’m a
Southern boy, and I tend to believe that SEC football is the most important
thing in the world. Only, Sambit has never heard of Auburn, or Alabama,
doesn’t know that they play college football, or that they are rivals. I
fumble around. This is perhaps America’s most intense rivalry. A fan just
poisoned two 130-year-old oak trees. It’s serious. I need an analogy.

My first thought: It’s like India-Pakistan in cricket.

Except, you know, for the four wars since 1947 and the constant threat of
nuclear holocaust. Other than that, Auburn-Alabama is just like India-
Pakistan.

_hashtag brilliant cricket long-reads for people who aren’t necessary into
cricket_

Don’t watch the ball!

The regular advice in sport is to watch the ball. Greg Chappell says: watch
the ball as little as possible. _Glance_ at the ball. Take it in, all at once,
only at the microsecond you need to.

I GET THE IMPRESSION, reading about his method, that what he’s doing with all
the “awareness” and “fine focus” activities is pre-loading information into
his unconscious mind so that, at the critical moment, he can respond
automatically.

It is not possible to “decide” what to do about a ball coming at you at 90mph.
What you can do is make sure your mind is pump-primed with all the available
context cues, with the highest signal to noise possible, and then act.

This gives me clues about how to organise my own work?

_(Not thinking about cricket now.)_

I’m building software rn, so I spend most of my time working on product.
There’s a lot of sketching, designing, roll-my-sleeves-up building work, and
planning.

One way of describing this work is: design and build. But that doesn’t sit
right with me. These two activities aren’t sequenced like that.

Now I can think of my sketching and designs in a different way: I am training
my intuition. I am _not_ deciding what to do. I am priming myself such that,
when a decision _needs_ to be made (when I’m building or somebody asks me for
feedback or when I’m putting together the plan for what to build next), I
automatically respond the right way in the instant.

This seems like a small twist in framing but actually I find the difference
quite freeing: I can see now that I’m no longer _meant_ to be right with my
sketches. I’m not _supposed_ to be straight to the point. What I’m doing is
scouting the field; I’m loading up my unconscious with everything it needs to
make the right choice later, intuitively.

It’s not about being logical. It’s not about making a rational decision.

The remaining question is: how to take lessons from Greg Chappell’s central
concept of fierce focus. How can I build my working day around a number of
critical decision points, exerting my intuition and reflexes intensely and
totally for the absolute minimum amount of time, and otherwise not keeping my
eye on the ball at all.
