# England is dense with ancient folktales

Southampton, which is where I went to school and near where I grew up, was
once upon a time terrorised by a giant named _Ascupart._

A knight named Bevois (this was about a thousand years ago) came to the
Southampton and dealt with the giant. Exactly how, stories differ. Either he
defeated and killed Ascupart. Or other tales say that Bevois, Ascupart, and
Bevois’ horse named Arundel became great friends and had many adventures.

I didn’t know this story growing up. I read it in a book recently. But there
is an Arundel Castle some way to the east, and a neighbourhood of Southampton
is named Bevois Valley, both of which I knew about, and (I’ve now learnt) an
Ascupart Street too. Stories in the landscape!

[Here is the story of Bevois and
Ascupart](https://bevoismounthistory.weebly.com/legends-and-folklore.html), as
told by storyteller Michael O’Leary. It’s a fun read.

This class divide is new to me:

The stories of Bevois, or Bevis, were once as popular as the stories of King
Arthur. The stories of Arthur, however, were considered a bit more grand and
courtly; the Bevois stories were for the common people.

Oh ho!

The book I’m reading is [The Lore of the Land:](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Lore-
Land-Englands-Legends-Spring-heeled/dp/0141021039) _A Guide to England’s
Legends, from Spring-heeled Jack to the Witches of Warboys,_ by Jacqueline
Simpson and Jennifer Westwood. ([Review in the
Guardian.](https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jan/21/highereducation.classics))

It seems you can’t walk a mile through England without tripping over a
hyperlocal folktale, and this book catalogues them.

Leafing through at random right now, I can tell you that:

Not in the book, but stories I’ve heard…

I can tell you that near where I live in south London (and by near I mean,
_“within 20 minutes walk”):_

And it turns out that the legend of [Spring-heeled
Jack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spring-heeled_Jack), the leaping figure
with metal claws who struck fear into London in the 1830s, is centred on
Peckham, also just walking distance. _(Spring-heeled Jack is an interesting
figure, a modern folktale or, as previously discussed, a[consensus
ghost](/home/2020/12/08/gatwick_drone).)_

It is dizzying. I guess it is like this everywhere in the world? I don’t know.
The land is dense with ancient stories! Every stone under every step, richly
encrusted with narrative barnacles.
