# Asimov’s Foundation, and what’s unique about science fiction

Isaac Asimov’s _Foundation_ books were the first real sci-fi I read, at about
9 or 10. Apple is releasing a TV adaptation in 2021 [(here’s the teaser
trailer)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xgbPSA94Rqg) – and I can’t help but
feel it misses the point, and what the magic of science fiction is.

You don’t need to have read _Foundation_ to read this post, but let me give
you the basics.

The premise of _Foundation_ is that the Galactic Empire collapses. One guy,
Hari Seldon, predicts the fall, and using his new science (psychohistory) is
able to tell that a 10,000 year dark age will follow. Yet he can create a new
future! He can shorten the dark age to only 1,000 years by establishing a new
society on a new planet - the Foundation of the title - to guide the galaxy
back to new heights. Using psychohistory, he shapes the destiny of the
Foundation long after his own death, using recorded messages that appear at
pivotal moments over hundreds of years.

_Foundation,_ the story, begins in the middle.

Asimov’s first _Foundation_ stories, written in the 1940s, were set 50 years
_after_ Hari Seldon’s death. The Galactic Empire had already fallen, the
Foundation was already established – but not entirely aware of its destiny. We
meet Seldon only as pre-recorded hologram messages. He uses fake-outs and the
holding back of information in order to forge the Foundation into what it
needs to become.

The story of _Foundation_ is _not_ the story of Hari Seldon. Fundamentally
it’s about _what happens next._

Look, nobody gets to say what science fiction _is_ or _isn’t,_ least of all
me.

But, for me, "what happens next" is, in a nutshell, exactly what is special
and unique about science fiction.

**Sci-fi is a scientific investigation, and the lab bench is the book.** It’s
a thought experiment in narrative form.

That’s what you don’t get anywhere else. The author has a setting that goes to
great lengths to be plausible: a world, a society, a group of people. Then the
subject of the investigation: a dead guy who prophesied the present and the
future, blessing the current society in ways beyond its knowing.

_What happens next?_ Sci-fi uses the power and constraint of story to find its
way through. And by doing that, discoveries are made.

Like any scientific endeavour it starts as a phenomenological exercise: what’s
happening? How does this thing behave in various circumstances? Then beginning
to probe: what are its limits? How do we break the premise? And finally
consequences… what does it mean for this phenomenon to be wielded
deliberately; what are the second order effects when others can see the
effects …and so on. Dynamical systems are all the same; the reader can readily
draw parallels and discover new truths.

And the new truths are about the present, of course.

_Foundation_ can be drawn out into a study of everything from America and
Manifest Destiny, to how to express individuality when growing up with wealth
and privilege.

For me, spaceships, distance planets and so on – these aren’t intrinsic to
science fiction. They’re lab equipment. They provide necessary narrative
distance from the everyday such that the reader (and the author) is able to
fully explore the premise. But you could do _Foundation_ without spaceships,
if you wanted.

They’re fun, of course.

But ultimately:

Spaceships and futuristic cities are just stage dressing.

After the first short stories and novellas, Asimov went in two directions.

After the main run of _Foundation_ novels, Asimov returned to Seldon, and
devoted a couple of books to telling his story.

But Seldon’s life only works as a story if you already know the unbelievable
truth, that his prophecies were correct (which is why _Foundation_ should be
read in publication order, not chronological). Otherwise he could be just
another conspiracy nut.

So, looking at the Apple TV trailer of _Foundation,_ it appears that the show
is about Hari Seldon, and it’s set during the impending fall of the Galactic
Empire.

What show runner wouldn’t want to put that glamour and rotten decadence on
screen? I get it!

BUT.

The science fictional _magic_ of the original stories is that we see the
aftermath - good and bad - of Seldon’s truth.

We get to see the maturing of the Foundation under the distance guidance of
his dead hand, one that everyone can see is always right – but that is none-
the-less stifling for its presence. And perhaps, eventually, might be wrong?

Glamour is shown without ever putting it on-screen (or rather, on the page).
We see old Empire only from a great distance, from the dusty frontier planet
of Terminus, the home of the Foundation at the edge of the galaxy. And we can
imagine its splendour!

The galaxy is more sprawling, Empire is grander, and Seldon more omniscient
for _never seeing them._

So I’m excited to see _Foundation_ on TV.

But from the trailer it looks like it’s leaning in hard on the far-future
fantastical setting – great, but for me that misses what makes sci-fi _sci-
fi._ It’ll be fun to see essentially the Fall of Rome with spaceships and a
massive CGI budget…

…but it looks like we’re not going to get to explore the what-ifs that made me
fall in love with _Foundation_ to begin with

And in the era of algorithms that decide our fate, and ethno-nationalists who
say that national past gives us rights over the future, I can’t think of
topics that need greater examination today.

My view on sci-fi (which is not universal, of course) is why I have such a
strong connection with design as a method for innovation: both put new objects
in familiar settings, crank the handle, and trust that the process will lead
to new ideas.

Science fiction is how we do design’s [thinking through
making](/home/2006/07/28/about_making_things) when the only way to make is to
put on a fictionsuit.

Isaac Asimov was horrible to women. I’ve noticed the [lack of women in
Foundation](http://osianh.blogspot.com/2012/07/foundation-and-patriarchy.html)
for as long as I can remember. What I didn’t know until a few years ago was
that [Asimov was a serial groper of women](http://www.factfiend.com/isaac-
asimov-kind-douchebag/), a notorious sexual harasser who was enabled by the
science fiction community.

Another note: why aren’t there any aliens in _Foundation?_ Well…

_Foundation_ was published in the magazine _Astounding._ Editor: [John
Campbell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_W._Campbell), whose vision and
energy drove the Golden Age of science fiction. It would be hard to overstate
his influence. However…

Asimov learned of Campbell’s insistence that humans should always be superior
to other races in some way. It was clear to Asimov that **Campbell’s own views
on race were the source of the imperative: just as whites were superior to
other humans, so humans had to be superior to any alien race.** Asimov didn’t
share Campbell’s views, and he didn’t want his stories to reflect them, even
allegorically. (In the robot stories, the problem didn’t exist. Campbell
didn’t mind if robots were superior to humans.) For the falling Galactic
Empire in “Foundation”, however, Asimov chose to sidestep Campbell’s racial
views by creating a galaxy-wide civilization with no alien races – a galaxy
inhabited only by humans.

Ouch.

The history of science fiction is not a proud one.
