# Favourite books, 2015

Favourite books read this year:

_New Things_ is so undramatic – the story of a wife at home, and a husband who
is a Christian missionary taking the word to people who are hard to
understand. Communication and distance runs through this book: Between the
couple; between the missionary and his community; between what’s really
happening and the reader.

It’s a delicate book. Half-told shadows of truths, understated language that
circumnavigates huge black holes of feelings where light doesn’t go.

I found out after reading it that Michel Faber [intends this to be his final
novel](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/27/arts/michel-faber-plans-to-stop-
writing-novels.html) – he wrote it while his wife was dying. Heartbreaking.
You can tell.

_Wild Life_ is by Molly Gloss who wrote [The Dazzle of the
Day](http://machine.supply/books/drewbuttons/92), a novel about a village of
Quakers who travel to another star system on a generation ship. They treat
repairing the solar sails like farming the fields. And it talks about
something that can’t be talked about from the inside: Silence.

So _Wild Life_ isn’t sci-fi, but - like _Strange New Things_ (did I mention
the Christian missionary visits aliens on another planet?) - it’s speculative
fiction: A woman gets lost in the woods, I don’t want to say much more than
that.

Except this. There’s a memorable period of silence in the woods. For me it
highlights what happens in silence… you become detached from what words do.
Words, somehow, add our expected reality onto our perceptions. Silence, by
removing words, simultaneously creates dissociation - a dreamlike state - but
also brings you closer to reality itself, requires you to become embedded.

The beginning, middle, and end of the silence is sensitively and insightfully
told.

_Archdruid_ is nonfiction. It’s John McPhee’s portrait of David Brower,
founder of Friends of the Earth, told in three parts, each part a fight with
another individual, an opponent, over an environmental issue: Mining, property
development, the damming of rivers.

The third part grabbed me especially – David Brower rafts down the Colorado
River with Floyd Dominy, through sites where Dominy has won and Brower has
lost. McPhee is there too, a participant observer. This isn’t journalism, it’s
telling a story through describing what happens between the three of them.

It strikes me that what these books by Faber, Gloss and McPhee have in common
is they all describe character enormously well.

Brower is speaking on behalf of wilderness. Rocks, trees, these things are
silent, at least in our human conversations. So we need people to speak for
them. Maybe. It’s a fuzzy domain. On the one hand, that which doesn’t speak
sometimes needs a voice, so perhaps we need speakers who will hold its
viewpoint inside. Essential if the rest of us aren’t going to destroy it by
trampling. But the risk is that when you speak for a thing that holds its own
counsel, you undermine its subjectivity and its sovereignty – its right to be
understood on its own terms.

McPhee describes the land in words that speak to me: "The Utah canyonland had
been severed halfway up by a blue geometric plane, creating a waterscape of
interrupted shapes." He is also the author of [Annals of the Former
World.](http://interconnected.org/home/2008/06/10/the_source_of_a_diamond)

What happens between people:

I have been having my mind slowly transformed by _Group Psychotherapy_ by
Foulkes and Anthony. I’ve had a long-standing interest in small group dynamics
that I’m [really beginning to
indulge](http://interconnected.org/home/2015/10/07/small_groups_and_consultancy)
this year, and along with Wilfred Bion’s [Experiences in
Groups](http://machine.supply/books/genmon/124), this is the best eye-opener
I’ve found.

Groups (social interactions, company) are the water in which we swim. Having
common group phenomena pointed out, or to be shown details of a group’s
evolution and its impact on individual behaviour, makes me feel like I’m
finally seeing something that was in-front of me all along.

This is also the book that introduced me to the role of the “participant
observer”… in these psychoanalytic situations, the person who attempts to
speak for the group, but is also part of it. Tricky. Enlightening.

When you can see something, well, that lets you ask questions like, why
couldn’t this be otherwise? And, what about the groups I haven’t looked at
yet, the ones with trees and rocks and other non-humans?

_Group Psychotherapy_ includes an analysis of the three person closed group in
[No Exit,](https://archive.org/stream/NoExit/NoExit_djvu.txt) the play by Jean
Paul Sartre in which he says "Hell is other people." I hadn’t clicked what a
tight description of the group this is. Now seeing how real it is, there’s
more there for me to read.

I guess that’s what brings together all of my favourites this year. There’s a
reality to the characters, and their interactions, and their behaviours and
evolution, and their situations; and so they tell me more - by speaking and by
not speaking - and they live longer in my imagination.
