# We need to revisit old frameworks to cope with the 2020s

Frameworks help us structure our thinking but it turns out that frameworks
from only 15 years ago have blind spots to current concerns. I have two
examples, one personal and one from business strategy.

What happened first is I cricked my neck putting together Ikea furniture and
couldn’t look left. (This is many years ago.) Then I picked up the first in a
string of running injuries. Around the same time I got a sort of perpetual
ringing in my ears. Oh there was a bunch. Bad luck.

I ran across the [Holmes-Rahe stress
scale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holmes_and_Rahe_stress_scale) (that’s its
Wikipedia page). This is a scoring system for _life events_ over the past 12
months. For example:

You go down the list, thinking about the last year. You add up your score.
There are 43 life events listed.

If you score 300+ then you have "80% chance of health breakdown within the
next 2 years."

It turns out I was right up there. Like, not one massive thing. But just a
series of middling-to-major life changes, one after another, month after
month. No wonder I was sick.

It was a comfort to know. I could look at my tally and say, hey you know, this
is _not normal._

This relates to Covid-19.

Global pandemics aren’t represented on the Holmes-Rahe stress scale. No shit.
It was made in 1970. It’s not a scale made for globalisation and the
[entropocene](/home/2021/07/30/entropocene).

It has “Change in living conditions” but it doesn’t have “I can’t make plans
because we might be in lockdown next week or we might not.” Or even: “When I
watch the news I’m concerned that democracy may collapse.” Or: “I can’t relax
because [technology is always watching me.](/home/2021/08/06/paranoia)” How
many life change units do those deserve?

This is corporate, not individual, but it’s similar.

There’s something called the Business Model Canvas (invented 2005). It’s a way
to describe a company on a single piece of paper. [Here’s the framework so you
can see](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Business_Model_Canvas.png).

Briefly, how it works…

A good business will connect together like circuit wiring, or fine clockwork.
Chains of causation and rhythms will align.

But sometimes even an attractive business will have something that doesn’t
quite connect, and it’s only possible to see when you put all the moving parts
down on paper like this.

The canvas looked like a toy when I first encountered it, but it has become
something I’ll sketch pretty frequently, and I run through mentally whenever I
listen to a startup pitch. (Have a look at [Guy Kawasaki’s 10 slide pitch
deck](https://guykawasaki.com/the-only-10-slides-you-need-in-your-pitch/) for
early stage startups. Pitch decks are a narrativised Business Model Canvas.)

ANYWAY.

**What the Business Model Canvas doesn’t have is externalities.** Like carbon,
or like paying people properly so they don’t need food banks.

If I were updating the Business Model Canvas today, I would draw two rings
around the entire canvas. The inner ring would be labelled “The state” and the
outer ring would be labelled “The planet.” On the left of each: “Taken out.”
On the right: “Put back.”

If employees (like drivers or warehouse workers) are only able to be listed in
the “Key Resources” box because they’re classified as independent contractors,
then list the welfare system on the left in the “State” ring. And balance it
by put something on the right: taxes.

And for the planet ring… Digging up non-renewables, manufacturing new plastic,
being responsible for emitting carbon; list these on the left. How to provide
a balance on the right? Well it’s hard, best to aspire to being part of the
[non-extractive economy](/home/2020/09/18/non_extractive_economy) instead.

_(Business Model Canvas is just one business school tool. It would be
interesting to re-write course material for an entire MBA to take a full
system approach to externalities.)_

So here are these two tools that need to be updated for the 2020s and beyond.
And I think both for the same reason: more than ever the world is dense and
quick with nonlinear feedback loops.

I’m not sure I would have felt so strongly that the Holmes-Rahe stress scale
and Business Model Canvas were both outdated, even 5 years ago. But it’s clear
they are, and who knows how much more.

Old assumptions about a steady state world are baked into everything from
Excel spreadsheets to psychology. That’s going to be some significant friction
in changing out ways. Learning how to live in the future means updating the
tools we have to think and talk about it.
