# FuelBand for alpha waves

I was waiting for a bus the other day, and had a pretty good time stand there,
wool gathering, contemplating the world, thinking about the various things I
needed to do, etc.

And on the bus after I thought: I don’t give myself enough time to stop and
think.

And then I thought: I don’t give myself enough time to exercise either, and
what I did in that case was buy a [Nike+
FuelBand](http://www.nike.com/fuelband/) and monitor how many steps I take
each day. (There was a surprise there: Factoring out exercise, there’s a huge
variation in my regular everyday activity, a four-times difference between
quiet days and active days although they feel much the same.)

So I bought a [MindWave from
Neurosky](http://store.neurosky.com/products/mindwave-1) which is a portable
electroencephalography (EEG) headset with dry sensors. That is, it measures
faint electrical activity on my head to read my brainwaves, and it’s “dry” so
I don’t need to soak the sensors in saline or anything like that.

In theory it should be able to measure when I’m concentrating, when I’m
excited/agitated, and when I’m relaxed.

It comes with a dongle to plug into my Mac so I can read the data from it
using the [MindWave developer
tools.](http://developer.neurosky.com/docs/doku.php?id=mindwave) (In
retrospect I should have bought the [MindWave
Mobile](http://store.neurosky.com/products/mindwave-mobile) which uses
Bluetooth and can also connect to the iPhone.)

It’s a shame the MindWave doesn’t store data itself – if I want to get long-
term readings then I will have to keep it paired with my Mac and store and
analyse the data there.

Why? Because I’d like to wear this the whole time, and become more mindful of
how much time - and for how long - I’m concentrating, reflecting, etc. And
over time, being mindful of this, could I see whether I’m happier/more
productive/more creative when I spend (say) regular time each day reflecting,
or long periods of time on a single day concentrating, and so on.

_Companies I would start if I wasn’t doing this one:_

The models currently in this space are exemplified by two companies, both
based on Neurosky’s technology:

Neurosky themselves have an [app
store.](http://store.neurosky.com/collections/applications)

But I think these companies are missing a trick. I’d like to introduce focus,
good design, and vertical integration, and take lessons from successes like
Nike+ and Foursquare.

I would love to take the Neurosky MindWave technology, have it store data for
later syncing as a [Bluetooth Smart
Device](http://www.bluetooth.com/Pages/Bluetooth-Smart-Devices.aspx), make it
look great, wrap a FuelBand self-awareness and goals iPhone app around it,
build in a mood tracking feature for feedback - maybe correlate it with email
and calendar/todo list activity, Twitter/Facebook updates (for another mood
datapoint), and Foursquare (for location) - and sell it as a headband.

You would share the time you’d spent reflecting each day on Facebook. There
would be challenges, and self-awareness. I might bootstrap a distributed
network of gym instructors for meditation (we’d have a marketplace for
subscription yogis).

Kind of a cross between [Brain Age](http://brainage.com/launch/index.jsp) (or
Brain Training depending on your territory), FuelBand, product sales plus
subscription services, quantified self, and mental well-being.

The really interesting stuff would happen when we start using machine learning
across vast amounts of data from tens of thousands of individuals, all
submitting brain wave and activity/mood data. We’d data-mine like crazy. What
would we learn? It would be a little like [23andme,](https://www.23andme.com/)
the data-mining + pathologies + gene sequencing company, and a little like
[Knewton](http://www.knewton.com/) with their personalised, adaptive learning.
Maybe we would end up saying things like:

You know you need to be on top form in 5 days? We know from past behaviour and
by looking at people like you that you need to spent 30 minutes more per day
in uninterrupted quiet reflection in order to achieve this. Here’s your goal.
Go!

There’s not _quite_ a business here, not at launch… but after you find out
what combinations of which mental states over a day promote what kind of
behaviours, and you can help people be mindful of that? There’s something
really big there, I’m sure.

I wish I had more hours in the day.

_Right now_

[I am using my MindWave](http://instagr.am/p/KrtQrEKpRZ/) and playing
[Blink/zone](http://store.neurosky.com/products/blink-zone) to explode
fireworks whenever I blink. When I don’t blink they don’t explode, when I do
blink they do. It works surprisingly well. It’s a weird experience to have
something I regard as so interior picked up by a computer.
