# Post at 09.07, on Tuesday 15 Mar 2011

Every morning I wake up to continuing [news from the Fukushima nuclear
plant](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-12740843 "Latest BBC News article.") in
Japan, which engineers are fighting to control. The problems - fires,
explosions, venting of radioactive gases, a fire in the spent fuel area, the
risk of fuel rods melting and releasing highly toxic substances into the
environment - are the result of broken cooling systems damaged by a tsunami,
itself the result of an earthquake, natural disasters in which large numbers
of people died, in highly local but massively multiple tragedies.

I write as if you didn't already know, mainly to wrap my own head around
what's going on. From the other side of the globe, I really can't grasp what's
been happening on the western Pacific Rim these last few months. The floods in
Australia, earthquakes in New Zealand and Japan, Japan's continuing crisis. I
don't have the imagination, it's a struggle to put myself there.

But Fukushima:

There are a few dozen engineers, and they're fighting, warring really against
this problem, this overheating. And there's little or no electricity, and
everything they're doing is outside operational parameters. It's become
chaotic. I can _just about_ get a little-finger hold on what that's like. They
said on the radio this morning (or maybe overnight) that the current attempts
to cool the overheating fuel rods are all improvised now. The engineers are
using fire engines to pump sea water in through internal sprinklers. It's
rumoured that one of the fires started when a fire engine ran out of fuel and
could no longer pump. I can _almost_ grasp that, the scrambling, the constant
brainstorming and the constant new emergencies. I can't quite get the rest.
The danger of death from radioactivity, the hundreds of thousands of people
evacuated from the local area. That's the size of the whole city where I went
to school!

The nuclear aspect touches old fears. I was born and grew up in the Cold War.
I was almost 12 years old in December 1989, at the time of the [Malta
Summit,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malta_Summit "The end of the Cold War.")
when the corner was turned, detente found, and the end of the War declared.
I'd had a childhood talking about atom bombs with my friends, and having
nightmares about mushroom clouds and fallout. The fiction we read in class was
often enough about nuclear apocalypse. A sudden escalation was not off the
cards. I remember the first day, in the early 1990s, that I realised that the
weight of possibility of nuclear war had lifted. I felt like I could breathe
for the first time.

1991-2001 were blessed years in the West. The Cold War had ended, and the
effects of foreign policy and a callousness to the rest of the world had not
yet cross-multiplied with psychopaths and boomeranged into terrorism. There
was crazy growth and there were easy recessions. India and China were off the
radar, changing slowly, but not the obvious inheritors of global cultural
leadership. The West was _it._

I feel no guilt. That was the most carefree decade I'll have.

So the events in Fukushima touch an old terror for me.

They'll never read this, but I wish the very best of luck to all those
fighting to bring the reactors under control. You're in my thoughts.

I want to end on something more abstract.

[Matt Jones](http://magicalnihilism.com/ "Personal blog.") and I were talking
in the studio yesterday and he mentioned the
[Holocene](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holocene "Wikipedia page") \-- the
geological period lasting from 12,000 years ago, the end of the most recent
glacial period, until now. All of recorded human history is within the
Holocene. But now, maybe (the story goes), we're in the
[Anthropocene:](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anthropocene "Another Wikipedia
page.") the epoch in which "human activities that have had a significant
global impact on the Earth's ecosystems."

It's the era of human-altered climate and of artificial islands. When
archeologists in a million years dig deep down and take a core sample through
2011 AD, they'll look at the thin, white, compressed layer of undecomposed
plastic waste and iridium traces - a geological layer 100% due to human
civilisation - and they'll point to it and say "Ah, the Anthropocene," before
turning it into shimmering jewellery and what-have-you.

The thing we have to realise is that this isn't an era of _control._ Our
attempts to control the world have multiplied so much that they themselves
have become part of the system, part of the world, and the entire thing has
once again become chaotic, unpredictable, and uncontrollable. We live in a
world in which we must constantly adapt, improvise, and take care. We must
show it respect (the world is not a resource: it is as big as us); we have to
swim through it, not walk over it. Engineering is not only problem solving,
and not only a way to manage risk, but an _improvisational_ skill. We're going
to need that.

It's all very grim in Fukushima. And I'm really feeling that grimness this
morning, apologies for passing it on.
