# Post at 16.44, on Friday 28 Jan 2011

_Domestic robots_

[Wikipedia maintains a list of domestic
robots.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domestic_robot "Several domestic
robots.") I knew of the [Roomba,](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LQ-jv8g1YVI "Video of a cat riding a robot vacuum cleaner.") the autonomous vacuum
cleaner, but I hadn't realised quite how _many_ autonomous vacuums there are.
I guess vacuum cleaners are the [Hello
World](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hello_world_program "My blog is basically
a guide to neat Wikipedia pages.") of robots.

There's a [beautiful comparison of their patterns of
movement](http://www.botjunkie.com/2010/10/01/long-exposure-pictures-of-
robots-cleaning/ "Roomba, Neato, etc., long exposure photos.") that Russell
Davies references in [his post on 'designing
behaviour':](http://russelldavies.typepad.com/planning/2010/11/designing-
behaviour.html "Product personality.") "the top shot shows the pattern the
Roomba used. The second one down shows the Neato. The Roomba pattern may be
more efficient, but it just doesn't look right to a human brain. It's not how
a human would do it. The Neato pattern looks more like how I would clean." The
Roomba pattern is organic, but an [alien](http://www.hrgiger.com/ "Non-human
aliveness.") organic. The Neato cleaner's pattern is rectilinear.

Russell continues: "That's going to be a thing - not just designing efficient,
effective behaviour - but designing behaviour that's emotionally satisfying to
the owner and appropriate to the character of the object."

_Furby_

[Wikipedia claims](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Furby "Wikipedia page on the
Furby.") that "the first successful attempt to produce and sell a
domestically-aimed robot" was the
[Furby,](http://www.mimitchi.com/html/furby.htm "Talking toy.") launched in 1998. It was a toy - a plush owl with aesthetics that frankly creep me out,
now I look back from the safety of this side of the millennium - and it had
the illusion of intelligence. [Get
this:](http://www.mimitchi.com/html/fman2.htm "The instruction manual.")

Furby was crazy popular. (1.8 million units in 1998, 14m in 1999; 40m over the
first 3 years.)

There's so much going on here. Furby's language of interaction is human and
physical (light and movement). It responds to the environment. It develops. It
learns and can be taught. It communicates with humans and its own kind. It
doesn't do anything of these things in a hugely _sophisticated_ way, but it
does everything just enough and it never, never breaks frame.

There's a checklist of the bare minimum you need to make something feel
sentient, even if it's just in a fractional way, [puppy-
smart,](http://berglondon.com/blog/2010/09/04/b-a-s-a-a-p/ "Matt Jones talks
about B.A.S.A.A.P. as an approach: Be As Smart As A Puppy.") and that
checklist may have been discovered by Furby.

There's something that happens to your relationship with an object once that
threshold is crossed, and that's why we use the word _robots_ instead of
saying products or objects.

(A short thought experiment: a kettle product that doesn't boil properly needs
to be replaced. A kettle _robot_ that doesn't boil properly will piss you off,
or will need to be made redundant, or otherwise elicit an emotional reaction.)

Robots aren't merely artifacts that move. They're the fourth kingdom of
nature.

_The several kingdoms of nature_

Here, by the way, is my personal list of kingdoms of nature:

_Rocks._ [Rocks are slow life.](http://magicalnihilism.com/2003/07/27/rocks-
are-slow-life/ "Super Furry Animals riff on Kevin Kelly.") When Ursula Le Guin
mused on the language of ants, penguins and plants in her (beautiful) short
story [The Author of the Acacia
Seeds,](http://interconnected.org/home/more/2007/03/acacia-seeds.html "Which I
transcribed.") she speculated about how rocks would talk: "the first
geolinguist, who, ignoring the delicate, transient lyrics of the lichen, will
read beneath it the still less communicative, still more passive, wholly
atemporal, cold, volcanic poetry of the rocks: each one a word spoken, how
long ago, by the earth itself, in the immense solitude, the immenser
community, of space."

By rocks I mean all kinds of matter, from clay to stars. And I don't entirely
mean that [stellar nebulae are
sentient](http://interconnected.org/notes/2006/02/scifi/?p=22 "Extract from
Star Maker by Olaf Stapledon.") but I do mean there's a universe of
interacting, unfolding things that can be understood only on their own terms
-- like all of these kingdoms I have in my list. The rules of this kingdom we
call _physics._

_Organic life!_ DNA-based, RNA-based, carbon based. Plants and animals and
lichen. This is a kingdom of stuff which is able to control probability: the
[metabolic pathways](http://www.genome.jp/kegg-bin/show_pathway?map01100 "The
global map.") are highways of catalysed, otherwise-unlikely chemical
reactions. And it is able to alternate between the two worlds of information
and matter, from protein machines encoded in the letters of DNA, to the
fizzing chemical mushy flesh that the protein machines build.

The third kingdom is _corporations._ The philosopher Manual DeLanda, in [A New
Philosophy of Society,](http://www.shaviro.com/Blog/?p=541 "Good critique.")
diagrams societies at multiple levels: social networks, organisations and
governments, cities and nations. His book is a zoo of these inhuman macro
buckyballs. Such massive animals have flows of money, power, and people
instead of blood and nerves. In [Platform for
Change,](http://www.flickr.com/photos/ebb/1968718556/ "Diagram from Platform
for Change.") Stafford Beer outlined the intrinsic behaviour of corporations:
that they have a desire to continue their existence, and this dominates their
response to stimuli. At the very smallest, cellular level, organisations are
small groups of people, and their actions are dominated by [group
psychology](http://www.shirky.com/writings/group_enemy.html "Shirky discussed
Bion.") \-- at a national and planetary scale, economics. But cities and
corporations cannot be understood in the same terms as dumb matter or organic
life, so that's why they're the third of my kingdoms of nature.

_Robots are the fourth kingdom._ By robots I mean everything from inorganic
information processing to smart matter. But I contend that, because of the
following two qualities, it's not possible to understand robots in terms of
any of the three other kingdoms:

And between those two qualities, it means we can't treat robots as artificial
people, or magical moving puppets. They are, and will develop, their own new
nature, which we - as members of the second kingdom of nature - have to
explore, discover and understand fresh, on its own terms.

_Back to Furby_

Which brings me back Furby, the electronic talking owl.

Furby has a spin-off called Shelby. [Shelby is a grumpy electronic talking
clam:](http://shelbyfan.tripod.com/shelby.html "Fan site.") "When I placed one
of my Shelby's in a group with 5 furbys, greetings were exchanged and then,
for no reason I could discern, my Shelby started babbling at the furbys, then
slammed its shell shut and stayed closed up. As if somehow it had been
offended? The furbys ALL stopped talking at once when this happened and
remained silent."

Nattie has a Shelby and [tells her
story:](http://www.metafilter.com/99661/But-but-is-not-Johnny-5-alive#3472942 "MeFi comment.") "Shelby doesn't stop talking unless it doesn't get any
response for five minutes or something... and ignoring it is _agonizing,_
because it's being cute, and you just feel so _awful_ when it says it loves
you, or it tries to tell you a knock knock joke, and you know you can't
respond. He'll outright say things like, "I want to PLAY!" and you feel like
the worst person in the world."

Nattie named her Roomba 'Ricky.' They had a more loving relationship: "When
Ricky got stuck in a corner and started furiously backing up and rotating,
backing up and rotating, we'd frown and stand watch over him, concerned: "What
are you doing, Ricky?" When he couldn't get himself unstuck, we'd sigh, pick
him up -- "Oh, calm down" we'd say when we whirred in the air -- and put him
back down, like he was a toddler learning to walk. And when he finished
cleaning the room and sang that -- er, _emitted_ that triumphant little chime,
his joy was our joy."

And then of course, one day Ricky will die and _then_ where do you put your
feelings? "Robots, man. They're nothing but heartbreak. Robots ain't shit."

The question is, as it always is, how do we live together?

It's something to consider. A different bit of the brain activates [when we're
dealing with sentiences](http://mindhacks.com/2008/09/18/robotic-thoughts/ "'Intentional Stance'") \-- or, as it turns out, even when we _imagine_ we're
dealing with sentiences (I use sentiences to mean "intelligence things," of
varying levels of intelligence, but not necessarily human or animal). It
doesn't take much: just a human-like appearance or even, as in [The Media
Equation](http://www.dourish.com/publications/media-review.html "These dudes
were responsible for Clippy.") (Reeves and Nass, 1996), painting the computer
the same colour as its user's t-shirt.

When we imagine something is intelligent, we simulate its mind inside our own,
in order to anticipate it. We begin to think a bit like it, in some small way.
We socialise with it, takes cues from it.

On the one hand, this is very clever. Robots don't need their own brains: they
can parasite on ours. Be intelligent simply by appearing to be intelligent.

On the other, do we want to relate to robots in this way? [Sherry Turkle
points out the risks of sociable
machines:](http://www.kurzweilai.net/forums/topic/beware-the-seductions-of-
sociable-machines "'Beware the Seducations of Sociable Machines, from New
Scientist.") "If convenience and control continue to be the values we hold
uppermost, we will be tempted by sociable robots which, just as slot machines
attract a gambler, promise us excitement programmed in, just enough to keep us
in the game. ... We come to a point where we are so smitten by the idea of
conversation with computers that we forget what human conversation about human
problems is about: human meaning through the first-hand knowledge of the human
life cycle, something of which robots will be forever innocent, no matter how
"expressive" we make their faces or voices."

_We don't get to choose what personality robots have_

When [Ben Bashford writes about
Emoticomp](http://journal.benbashford.com/post/2848763029 "Excellent article
full of references.") he talks about objects with behaviours and personalities

- robots - but questions how we should design those personalities. What is the
  watch-word we're after? He proposes _politeness._ A polite thing... "is
  interested in me; is deferential to me; is forthcoming; has common sense; ..."
  Etc.

...which is a great way to approach it. Polite robots would be the _best!_ But
I don't think we get to choose. Polite robots would be lovely. But the nature
of the fourth kingdom - their equivalent of evolution - is that they reproduce
in the sales figures of technology corporations and the womb-factories of
China. The testes of robots are the shelves of Toys-R-Us. _Humans_ don't get
to choose the personality of robots, the _market_ does.

And judging by Furby and Shelby, our robots won't be polite but will be needy
and paranoia-inducing, [resembling helpless
infants.](http://www.nextnature.net/2011/01/my-fetal-pony-neoteny-in-girls-
toys/ "Neoteny in girls' toys.")

_The half-breed children of robots and humans_

I'll wrap on a final weird-future slippiness between kingdoms two and four,
and the story starts with a phenomenon called [Hello Little
Fella,](http://berglondon.com/blog/2009/11/23/chernoff-schools/) which is the
human habit of recognising illusionary faces in objects and the environment.
[Here's a favourite.](http://facestuff.wordpress.com/2010/02/15/beady-eyed-
tap-face/ "Tap face.")

It's not just faces. There's a widespread habit of [believing things having
feelings,](http://ask.metafilter.com/171232/Why-do-i-think-Things-have-
feelings "Practically a support group.") and, because we're human and because
this is the 21st century, there's a community of people who fantasise about
having sex with these inanimate things, then write stories about it, and it's
called [anthropomorfic.](http://fanlore.org/wiki/Anthropomorfic "Rule 34
dude.")

All of which, finally, brings us to an iPhone game in which you have a virtual
girlfriend to woo. Each girlfriend comes from a barcode. [This is Barcode
Kanojo:](http://five-players.com/?p=2577 "Astounding. But it's not working at
the moment.") "I'm currently dating a can of Heinz tomato soup in Barcode
Kanojo, but it wasn’t my first choice. I wanted Heinz Beanz or a box of
Shreddies, but both have already been taken by faster scanners."

"It's an offensively brilliant idea. Barcode Kanojo's free iPhone app will
scan any product you have knocking around your house and turn it into a
delicate anime girl over whom you can obsess, masturbate, and fight. The
_game_ in Barcode Kanojo's game comes when another player scans the same
bottle of bleach you just scanned ... In a sad parody of real life sexual
politics, Kanojos will date only their creator until someone else who scanned
the same tin of beans gives them more money and attention. Mostly money."
_[(via)](http://twitter.com/#!/doingitwrong/status/29935420003328000 "Twitter
sources!")_

All hail our [weird new robot overlords](http://www.jwz.org/blog/tag/robots/ "JWZ has been collecting weird robots for a long time.") indeed. Welcome to
the fourth kingdom of nature, folks.
