# New horizons for office furniture

I spend so much time on Zoom these days, I would prefer to be bobbing around
in a salt-water bath with a virtual reality headset strapped to my face. Like
the [precogs in Minority Report](http://www.scifimoviepage.com/sci-fi-nerd-
modern-classics-minority-report-2002-big-brother-is-watching/).

Yet I’m at a desk sitting on a chair. How else could it work? WELL.

v buckenham [in a tweet](https://twitter.com/v21/status/1332244602586324993):
"I continue to joke about, but increasingly just want, [this giant motorised
scorpion chair](https://www.designboom.com/design/scorpion-gaming-chair-
cluvens-09-14-2020/)"

Check out that scorpion gamer chair. You straddle and recline on the scorpion;
its tail hangs over your head and suspends two widescreen monitors. Your arms
rest atop menacing scorpion pincers at the end of which are your keyboard and
your mouse.

The entire thing is articulated. _It moves._ Seriously, go to the article and
be amazed at the gifs.

So… honestly, why isn’t office furniture as brave as this?

Way back in 1968, [The Mother of All
Demos](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mother_of_All_Demos) in which Doug
Engelbart demonstrated, for the first time, hypertext, video conferencing,
word processing, remote collaboration – and the computer mouse. AND ALSO!
Office furniture.

Engelbart’s team, for the first time, separated the screen from the keyboard.
Before that, the VDU (visual display unit) and the input device were a single
object.

[Here’s a gallery of workstation
photos](https://www.dougengelbart.org/content/view/224/217/) from the Demo. In
particular, here’s the [ergonomic workstation in
action](https://www.dougengelbart.org/content/view/224/217/#galleryLab-6):
it’s an Eames chair with a custom console mounted over the user’s lap. The
console ([a closer
look](https://www.dougengelbart.org/content/view/224/217/#galleryMouse-10))
has a keyboard, mouse, and chording keyboard placed just where you need them.
There’s no desk: the screen is on a separate stand some distance away. The
console chair was specially commissioned and designed by modernist office
furniture designers _Herman Miller_ ([here’s their write-
up](https://www.hermanmiller.com/stories/why-magazine/mother-of-invention/)).

The point is that new technology and new contexts can and should drive new
furniture.

Case in point: this is a fascinating [review of how to work in virtual
reality](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/7gsehrZnvXo2YGiT7/working-in-virtual-
reality-a-review). Some highlights:

There’s a good photo/screengrab of the virtual from inside one of these VR
setups: it’s a virtual room, with a regular computer screen hanging in the
middle of it.

_(Aside: I think this is one of the early compelling use cases for VR or
augmented reality smart glasses. Think of the glasses as a competitor for
monitors. On a plane, assuming we’re ever travelling again? Strap on your
glasses and immerse in your own private movie theatre. Or work, anywhere, with
a multiscreen setup just like you have at home… but without having to carry
it.)_

If you’re working in VR, do you really need a desk? Or an office chair?

Here’s another concept: velcro.

I ran across this excellent interview with internet OG Justin Hall. Who, it
turns out, has been experimenting with aprons.

I want to have an ergonomic computer setup wherever I work – standing, sitting
in a task chair, someone’s dining table, on a couch. As I was switching
between sitting and standing in different work settings, I attached velcro to
my pants to hold my keyboard and trackpad from sliding on the floor. Recently
I was able to produce a velcro apron with $30 materials sourced on Amazon at
retail prices. It holds my input accessories in place whether I am sitting or
standing! I’m currently describing this with my hands at my sides, typing into
a split keyboard attached to my apron.

Which I _love._

What if the cyberpunk of the future isn’t the black leather jacket and dark
techno future of [Mondo 2000’s dream in
1996](https://fusion.tv/story/179818/r-u-a-cyberpunk/) – but instead,
outdoorsy, heavy cotton, Portland-barista-style apron, and homespun
haberdashery?

All of which reminds me of sui generis science pioneer [Stephen Wolfram’s
productivity setup](https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2019/02/seeking-the-
productive-life-some-details-of-my-personal-infrastructure/), revealed in
2019, which includes a laptop body harness for working while on woodland
walks! Go to that article and check out the pictures. There must be something
in the air.

I’m more than slightly tempted with getting myself a first class airplane
passenger seat, which it turns out [you can buy](http://www.skyart.com/first-
business-class-seats/), because at least those are designed to be sat in for
12 hour at a time.

I was speculating the other month about [new rooms we all need
now](/home/2020/04/02/new_rooms) but maybe the starting point is furniture for
the home office.

Where are the new form factors?

What about the Ikea office pod, or the wireless-charging beanbag with
capacitative touch fabric keyboard, or the Bloomberg terminal scorpion chair,
or the Apple augmented reality smart specs 5K screens, or the Patagonia
velcro-enabled walking desk apron, or the ergonomic home office Gmail trapeze,
or the Excel cocoon?

Cowards.
