# Modern consensus ghosts such as the Monkey Man and the Gatwick Drone

**Conjecture:** under great pressure, societies can collectively manifest
illusionary objects. These psychic projections, which sometimes appear as
terrifying beasts, encode powerful fear or anger or disconnection – and also
its resolution.

This is a post about the Gatwick Drone, but I’m going to take the scenic
route.

Longtime readers will know of my interest in the Monkey Man. Almost a decade
ago, the Monkey Man terrorised New Delhi.

Here’s a great summary of the phenomenon:

Early in May 2001, rumours began spreading though New Delhi that an aggressive
monkey-like entity was rampaging through the overcrowded suburbs after sunset.

Householders who habitually slept on their flat roofs during the sweltering
Indian summer claimed that they were being indiscriminately attacked by the
Monkey Man, who leapt from roof to roof, biting and scratching as he went. One
man had even fallen to his death fleeing from the creature.

Descriptions of the entity varied considerably, but most witnesses agreed that
it was short and furry with glowing red eyes.

And a contemporary article communicates some of the terror (16 May, 2001):

In Noida, a mechanic wearing a black outfit and fitting a description of the
Monkey Man was beaten up. A second man was attacked for apparently performing
“mystical formulations”.

Some witnesses say the failure to capture the Monkey Man is explained by his
ability to make himself invisible.

Deepali Kumari, from Noida, said: “It has three buttons on its chest. One
makes it turn into a monkey, the second gives it extra strength, the third
makes it invisible.

“He touches a lock and it breaks. But he is afraid of the light.”

[I’ve found a cache of old news
stories.](http://web.archive.org/web/20020925093626/http://www.ananova.com/news/index.html?keywords=Monkey+Man&menu=&startingAt=21)
Since they tell the story of that month pretty well, I’m going to copy and
paste the subheds below. (These are all the stories tagged “Monkey Man” on
this particulare site.)

Appearance. Chaos and fear and the inability of authorities to do anything
about it. The fear is taken seriously and the attacks abate. A tentative
speculation about the Monkey Man’s psychological origins; a fierce denial. The
phenomenon tails off.

There were people wounded in cases of mistaken identity! There were riots!

So what was going on?

I can’t dismiss this as a delusion, or mass hysteria, for three reasons:

For me, the clue is found in these facts: The Monkey Man attacked at night and
caused fear; the Monkey Man was scared of water.

[Back to that
summary:](http://web.archive.org/web/20100208111756/http://graylien.110mb.com/monkeyman.html)

So there we have it – in a period of electricity outages (and, I remember
reading, water shortages), and knowing that the Monkey Man would create
unrests, communities found a way to force authorities to turn on the lights
and prioritise running water. It’s almost like a magic spell.

Does that make the Monkey Man any less real? I don’t think so. Reading the
news articles, it seems like many people weren’t in on the joke… especially
not the people who got beaten up. _(Or maybe a fake “mistaken identity” was a
good excuse for something that would have happened anyway…)_

I don’t have my notes to hand, but I seem to remember a similar Goat Man
appearing in Mexico City (late 20th century) and, in 19th century London,
there was [Spring-heeled Jack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spring-
heeled_Jack) who sounds and acts very like the Monkey Man.

I was thinking of the Monkey Man when I read this [fantastic long
read](https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2020/dec/01/the-mystery-of-the-
gatwick-drone) in _The Guardian_ about the Gatwick drone: " A drone sighting
caused the airport to close for two days in 2018, but despite a lengthy police
investigation, no culprit was ever found. So what exactly did people see in
the Sussex sky?"

115 sightings. 222 witness statements. 1,000 flights cancelled. 140,000
passenger affected, just before Christmas.

No such drone existed.

The Gatwick incident was the first time a major airport was shut down by
drones, and it distilled deep cultural anxieties - from the threat of
terrorism and unconventional attacks by hostile states, to our fear of new
technology.

The article cites some other urban legends (the Croydon cat killer is a recent
one, local to me), but they aren’t quite the same. The Gatwick drone resulted
in something: collective misgivings about flying, airport expansion,
vulnerability to terrorism, etc, manifested in a physical drone – _which
closed down the airport, relieving the fears._

To me this is an infant Monkey Man. Had the drone proven only a touch more
effective, let’s say by reducing the number of planes landing into airports
where drones were “sighted,” I suspect there would have been many, many
Gatwick Drones, all over the world.

The Monkey Man and the Gatwick Drone are massively multiplayer Ouija boards.

We all have our fingers on the pointer. Maybe we can feel it pulling towards
the letters; maybe we’re doing the pushing. Maybe the messages are deliberate;
maybe they’re a form of dowsing the collective unconscious - some kind of
Jungian Hadron Collider - or maybe it’s direct from the spirit world. We don’t
know and we can’t know, and that’s the point.

The point is that these manifestations sit halfway between fact and fiction.
It doesn’t matter who believes and who’s faking it – what matters is that
nobody needs to say what the goals are out loud, and yet it is efficacious
none-the-less. The power comes back! The planes stop!

And maybe this is a decent way of understanding other collective “hysterias”
such as Qanon: not by looking at what they do, that’s not relevant, but by
looking at what they force the _rest_ of us to do as an apparent side-effect.
How do we bend in response? Now let’s interpret that response, not as a side-
effect but as _intended._

One last connection. What I’m talking about are
[hauntings](/home/2020/11/09/haunted_radio) and my favourite haunting in
fiction is in _Hamlet._ For me, _Hamlet_ is an astounding feat because it is
utterly, utterly true to life. Every character, every feeling, every
consequence: so believable, so human. Yet it opens with a ghost! The
supernatural. One way to understand the ghost is that it is a psychic
manifestation of a community under great pressure: everyone at Elsinore knows
of the murder of the old King yet, because of the status hierarchy, they are
unable to voice the truth to Prince Hamlet. Between the unstoppable force and
the immovable object is forged the ghost, a psychic diamond the actualisation
of unspeakable need.

_([I’ve posted about Hamlet before.](/home/2015/12/16/hamlet))_

Anyway.
