# With GE and Juicero, the Internet of Things world has taken a battering this week

It’s been a rough week for business and the Internet of Things.

On the industrial IoT end of things, GE - which has bet on _“digital
industrial”_ in a big way - has scaled back its target revenue in this space
from $15 billion in 2020 to $12 billion. With industrial IoT we’re talking
applications like remote monitoring of wind turbines, improved construction
equipment utilisation, and smart power grids.

Even GE’s adjusted numbers are massive, but as [Stacey Higgenbotham’s
analysis](http://mailchi.mp/iotpodcast/stacey-on-iot-if-ge-cant-master-
industrial-iot-who-can) explains, the adjustment shows that "industrial IoT
isn’t a problem that can be tackled as a horizontal platform play." She gives
a couple of related examples, including

Samsara, a startup that formed in 2015, aimed to build a wide-scale industrial
IoT platform that started with generic sensors. It has since narrowed its
focus to fleet monitoring and cold-chain assurance, which is how some of the
earliest users of its product used it.

For me, this is a healthy shift. The technology behind the sharp, physical end
of the Internet of Things is stabilising but still in flux. And I mean
everything: data centres, connectivity, monitoring tools, security,
provisioning standards, and so on. For a company like GE, building platforms
in a fast-changing platform ecosystem is a long way from core competency, and
not a good place to be.

Instead, [as I’ve said before](https://iotuk.org.uk/its-finally-business-
value-that-matters-in-iot/), focus on applications. Provide real business
value with whatever platform tools are at hand, and leave room to hop
technology as and when.

[Widely mocked startup Juicero is shutting
down.](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/sep/01/juicero-silicon-
valley-shutting-down) Juicero raised $120MM to sell a $400 home juicer. Not
any fruit; only proprietary Juicero packets. Using IoT technology to keep the
consumer channel open, the projected lifetime value must have been enticing to
investors. But the product made a number of missteps: a little too keen to tap
that recurring revenue, it wouldn’t work without wi-fi.

Despite this news, I remain convinced that

However, we can take some lessons.

If the Juicero juicer is really a channel, not a product per se, shouldn’t it
have been managed by a brand strategist – someone sensitive to the latent
meaning of the product features (and anti-features) for the audience, and
their impact? My hunch is that, with just a couple of small changes, Juicero
would have felt high-value rather than money-grubbing.

Marketing matters!

_(And if you need to be convinced, read Russell Davies on the iPhone TV ads
and his concept of[pre-experience
design](http://russelldavies.typepad.com/planning/2008/04/pre-
experience.html).)_

With my startup hat on, I can see the reason to charge for the machine. For
the consumer however it’s simply paying to have the privilege of paying more.
There’s an equitable balance to be found, I’m sure, but maybe this the best it
gets for business models in consumer IoT: there are nice businesses to be
built (maybe even at scale like Nespresso), but they will always be a hard
slog and never have the margins of a pure software play.

But but but. I remain positive:

[As the Reverend of Revenue says](https://medium.com/strong-words/no-more-
lost-decades-901027c6b1df), profitability means you can own your own destiny.
Could Juicero have sought to build a business that worked small and allowed it
to fund its own growth? And on that platform, for hardware startups, could
there be discovered the scale of the non-hardware Silicon Valley-style
startups? That was the Amazon playbook, after all.

The ideal business model for consumer IoT remains elusive.

I ran the [R/GA IoT Venture Studio](https://www.rgaiot.com) earlier this year
centred around what we dubbed _Enterprise IoT,_ that sweet-spot which offers
real business value like industrial IoT, but with the productised scalability

- and faster route to market - of consumer.

The native business model of Enterprise IoT is _hardware-enabled SaaS._ The
[software-as-a-service
mindset](http://interconnected.org/home/2015/02/17/filtered) is cribbed from
the online world, and it’s not just a pricing model but a whole set of
techniques about marketing, pricing, metrics, and growth. It’s neat because it
means recurring revenue, and that matches the cadence of the recurring
operating costs necessary for these kind of server-heavy data businesses.

What “hardware-enabled” means is that although the hardware is necessary (it’s
a sensor, or a camera, or whatever), it’s not core. It can be commodity. To
take two examples from the recent Venture Studio, we worked with
[Winnow](http://www.winnowsolutions.com) which is enabled with a smart food
waste bin in the commercial kitchen, but provides ongoing value (and charges
monthly for) the intelligence that produces. And [Hoxton
Analytics](https://www.hoxtonanalytics.com) which monitors pedestrian footfall
using machine learning. It uses commodity web-connected cameras (from Cisco)
but, again, is primarily a data play providing ongoing value.

I’ve seen close-up how these hardware startups are able to focus on their true
differentiation – which isn’t the hardware.

Another benefit of this model is that these startups have customer retention
literally bolted to the wall, yet they’re able to sidestep the friction and
risk of custom hardware development and batch production.

So if hardware-enabled SaaS is the model for Enterprise IoT, could there be a
similar flip for consumer?

My instinct is that there’s a [freemium](https://hbr.org/2014/05/making-
freemium-work)-like model to be found. Popularised by LinkedIn, freemium was
the realisation that - with a digital service - 5% paying of a _massive_
customer base is better than 100% of a tiny one.

This wouldn’t quite the same for consumer, but imagine a fictional Juicero (to
stick with that example) that was a great juicer for _any_ fruit – and also
the ability to “upgrade” to a hassle-free monthly subscription of more exotic
juice packets.

Of course LinkedIn innovated on both revenue and distribution simultaneously.
It wouldn’t have worked without the viral traversing of your address book.
Consumer IoT hasn’t yet discovered its virality, and that’s a challenge.

Conspicuous setbacks like those above damage confidence in the Internet of
Things, but they’re part of the process and it’s important to learn from them.

IoT is an enabler, not a feature. Like machine learning, it’s an
[interoperating](https://iotuk.org.uk/the-interop-internet-of-things/) set of
technologies and approaches that opens doors in all kinds of sectors. For IoT,
the immediate value is in bringing the dividends of the 50 year digital boom
right into the real world.

This is a challenge for the business world (for corporates, for investors, and
for founders) because there’s no guarantee that (a) existing business
practices will remain intact; or, (b) lessons learnt about the Internet of
Things in one sector will translate to a second.

So what to do if you’re in that world? Watch, learn, experiment, and share.
It’s how we get through the [idea maze](http://cdixon.org/2013/08/04/the-idea-
maze/) together.
