# Post at 21.39, on Monday 10 Jan 2011

I'm currently in the middle of reading _Journey into Space_ by Toby Litt,
which is about a generation ship and includes some breathtakingly beautiful
descriptions of meteorology and the Lake District.

And, like a perfect **idiot,** I went and started reading [this review by
Ursula Le Guin of the
same,](http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2009/feb/28/journey-into-space-toby-
litt "It's a good review by a good author... only, SPOILERS.") and of course,
not many paragraphs in, ran into _massive spoilers._ So I'll go back and read
that properly once I've finished the novel.

If you can't go faster that the speed of light _and_ you're going somewhere
far away, it's going to take more than a human lifetime to get there. People
will have to be born (and die) on the same spaceship. Hence: generation ship.
I like [generation
ships](http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/GenerationShips "Bye bye,
I've just sent you down the TV Tropes rabbit-hole.") (and there are lots
listed at that link). The concept raises some interesting issues: how do you
maintain knowledge? Particular social values? Do people get bored? Does the
6th generation still care about landing? Do wars happens; do they care about
Earth? Is it all just a metaphor for growing up and getting old?

Here are [several more generation ship
novels.](http://ask.metafilter.com/163729/Generation-Ship-Novels "Metafilter
thread.")

My favourite is [Paradises
Lost,](http://www.ursulakleguin.com/Birthday_Excerpts.html#Paradises "Excerpt") a novella in Le Guin's collection _Birthday of the World._ Early
on, she gets across the lack of danger (and variety) on-ship: "The smaller-
order world revealed here is an austere one. No amoeba oozing along, or
graceful paisley-paramecium, or vacuum-cleaning rotifer; no creature larger
than bacteria, juddering endlessly under the impacts of molecules."

"And only certain bacteria. No molds, no wild yeasts. No virus (down another
order). Nothing that causes disease in human beings or in plants. Nothing but
the necessary bacteria, the house-cleaners, the digesters, the makers of dirt
-- clean dirt. There is no gangrene in the world, no blood poisoning. No colds
in the head, no flu, no measles, no plague, no typhus or typhoid or
tuberculosis or AIDS or dengue or cholera or yellow fever or ebola or syphilis
or poliomyelitis or leprosy or bilharzia or herpes, no chickenpox, no cold
sores, no shingles. No Lyme disease. No ticks. No malaria. No mosquitoes. No
fleas or flies, no roaches or spiders, no weevils or worms. Nothing in the
world has more or less than two legs. Nothing has wings. Nothing sucks blood.
Nothing hides in tiny crevices, waves tendrils, scuttles into shadows, lays
eggs, washes its fur, clicks its mandibles, or turns around three times before
it lies down with its nose on its tail. Nothing has a tail. Nothing in the
world has tentacles or fins or paws or claws. Nothing in the world soars.
Nothing swims. Nothing purrs, barks, growls, roars, chitters, trills, or cries
repeatedly two notes, a descending fourth, for three months of the year. There
are no months of the year. There is no moon. There is no year. There is no
sun. Time is divided into lightcycles, darkcycles, and and tendays. Every
365.25 cycles there is a celebration and a number called The Year is changed.
This Year is 141. It says so on the schoolroom clock."

Lovely words!
