# Wild Palms and default genres

I’m halfway through my twice-a-decade rewatch of _Wild Palms_ and it’s
striking how much it uses melodrama, and actually the overall feel is that of
a daytime serial.

If you haven’t seen it, here’s the single para overview:

_Wild Palms_ is a 1993 Oliver Stone sci-fi miniseries, based on Bruce Wagner’s
comics of the same. Based in 2007 Los Angeles (everyone wears Victorian
shirts) it’s about virtual reality but through the lens of the TV company that
introduces the first show with at-home holograms. There are drugs that, when
you overdose, cause you to see cathedrals. The boss is a senator who has
founded a Scientology-like religion about synthetic reality, the protagonist
is a patent attorney, and the entire thing turns out to be a political feud.
But it’s barely science fiction at all – it’s super domestic, the story of
upper middle class families in LA. The cast list is insane. There’s a William
Gibson cameo 26 minutes into the first episode, and beyond the TV show there’s
a book called the _Wild Palms Reader,_ a compilation from Brenda Laurel (who
was also wetware consultant), Hans Moravec, Genesis P-Orridge, William Gibson
again, and Bruce Sterling. The book is half fictional world-building and half
factual speculation about our actual futures, and the entire thing is a genre-
bending high-water mark for what fiction can be.

Ok! So.

Wagner’s comics went hard on the punning and bombastic statements so they
really lent themselves to melodrama. But if _Wild Palms_ were being made today
it would be a superhero flick or a pompous futuristic epic (I love Apple’s
_Foundation_ but oof it takes itself so seriously) – we don’t have any other
ways to access that kind of narrative. Back in the 1990s it was possible to do
something that I can only describe as _“Dynasty_ with smart glasses”. (As much
as the TV networks tried to frame _Wild Palms_ as being like _Twin Peaks,_ it
really wasn’t – barely any symbolism, no mystery to pull in the audience, and
not at all arch.)

What gets me thinking is how obvious it is _today_ that _Wild Palms_ uses the
genre tropes of a daytime serial - domesticity, hopping between characters,
linear time, melodrama and cliffhangers - but in my previous watches, it
hasn’t stood out to me so much.

My guess is that daytime serials were _“in the air”_ in the 90s, to the point
that it may not have even been a decision much thought about – it was just the
default mode of storytelling. Just as the default mode in the 00s was crime
procedurals, and the 20s are all about season arcs and world-building.

This idea of default genres for storytelling is from a (sci-fi author) Neal
Stephenson talk that I saw many years ag and which stuck with me.

He sums up genres like this: "Romance fused with the film industry and Crime
fused with the television industry."

You can make a lot of money on films that consist entirely of action, but
there are only so many young males in the world. Romance appeals to more
people. Romance is versatile. All by itself, it is enough to make a successful
movie. Added to a screenplay, it works like monosodium glutamate in food,
which is to say it does not matter whether the underlying material is poor or
excellent to begin with, adding some of this wonder ingredient always makes it
better.

What Romance became to the film industry, Mystery/Crime became to the
television industry. They are made for each other. A television series needs
to tell a fresh story each episode. Romance is not a good fit. You cannot have
your lead character fall in love with a different person each week. Westerns
worked okay for a while, but eventually, the writers ran out of things that
could possibly happen on ranches and began to mix things up with ideas like
the ‘Wild Wild West’. By comparison, TV shows about detectives have it easy.

So there’s this symbiosis of _genre_ and _medium._

But it turns out the hybrid wasn’t police procedurals and television – it was
police procedurals and _syndicated_ television.

Streaming TV needs another genre entirely, and that’s where we get into this
season arc and world-building thing. Worlds give you infinite texture to
spread out over hours and hours, and character is the way this world is
raytraced. Watching characters interact is like the title-sequence clockwork
of _Game of Thrones:_ watching TV in the 2020s is watching a pachinko machine.
Half the joy is just the captivating quality of seeing the utterly
predictable-in-bulk and complicated thing happen; the other half is the joy of
unpredictable-in-specifics surprise.

(The equivalent stickiness in film is not season arcs but cinematic universes;
you can’t binge watch on the big screen so it’s not linear but mycelial.)

There should be more genre experimentation.

**ALSO.** It would be interesting to think about Stephenson’s perspective on
genre re: the genre that has co-evolved with the Facebook newsfeed as a
medium; or the genre for TikTok etc. What are those? The medium has fused with
the recommendation algorithm, which I’m not sure if Marshall McLuhan ever
anticipated but I would love to know.

Anyway, watch _Wild Palms._ Back in the day I would carry the AVIs around on a
USB stick on my keyring to foist on people outside the pub but I’m sure
nowadays you can find the rips on YouTube.
