# Post at 17.04, on Monday 18 Feb 2008

Getting older. From [this](http://flickr.com/photos/ebb/2274243050/ "A baby
photo. You can't resist.") to [that](/home/2001/10/15/i_feel_the_need_to "I
don't recall the occasion, but it looks like I wanted to live forever.") and
now here, I'm 30. In addition, my [lightcone](/home/more/lightcone/ "I really
should update this with a fresh database.") is two weeks away from Gamma
Pavonis and some weeks ago enveloped its 45th star, Kappa-1 Ceti. Down to the
forest where I grew up to celebrate, knotting off
[loop](/home/2001/03/04/ive_spoken_before "Closing the university loop back in
2001.") after [loop](/home/2000/06/03/you_are_a_point_in_space "My curve was
straight.").

You don't talk about the ingredients getting old when you make soup, you wait
for the complexity to emerge. Two ingredient combine, and then there are three
flavours. And they themselves recombine in all permutations and you have six
plus three is nine flavours. And then they combine, and so on. Not getting
older but simmering. Thirty years _cooked_.

What have I learned? That I get a long way by assuming the other person is
right and knows more than I do, and that I should always try to understand--I
too often don't listen well enough. That everyone has something fascinating
about them, and I'll never be bored so long as I'm trying to find the stories.
But that some people are idiots; that took a lot of time to figure out. Always
create. How I learn--that was a big one, and it's opened many doors. That hard
work with my body is fun just like hard work with my head, and that both are
better in combination. I wish I'd worked that out sooner. How to not be
precious about what I write and how to collaborate.

And then there are general, often contradictory life principles I've run on
for years, and they're doing me very well thank you: be less tolerant; care
more; care less; speak and do without thinking first, but consider afterwards;
do what I want and if it's toxic, move on; don't avoid being wrong or foolish,
and it's possible to be wilfully obscure, absurd and fib while simultaneously
meaning every single word; everything is interesting.

The first chapter of Deleuze and Guattari's **A Thousand Plateaus** is
[Rhizome](/home/more/2005/06/1000Plateaus00Rhizome.pdf "Complete with opening
score.") [pdf], and it includes this advice:

"Where are you going? Where are you coming from? What are you heading for?
These are totally useless questions. Making a clean slate, starting or
beginning again from ground zero, seeking a beginning or a foundation-all
imply a false conception of voyage and movement (a conception that is
methodical, pedagogical, initiatory, symbolic...). ... move between things,
establish a logic of the AND, overthrow ontology, do away with foundations,
nullify endings and beginnings. ... The middle is by no means an average; on
the contrary, it is where things pick up speed. Between things does not
designate a localizable relation going from one thing to the other and back
again, but a perpendicular direction, a transversal movement that sweeps one
and the other away, a stream without beginning or end that undermines its
banks and picks up speed in the middle."

"Write to the nth power, the n - 1 power, write with slogans: Make rhizomes,
not roots, never plant! Don't sow, grow offshoots! Don't be one or multiple,
be multiplicities! Run lines, never plot a point! Speed turns the point into a
line! Be quick, even when standing still! Line of chance, line of hips, line
of flight. Don't bring out the General in you! Don't have just ideas, just
have an idea (Godard). Have short-term ideas. Make maps, not photos or
drawings. Be the Pink Panther and your loves will be like the wasp and the
orchid, the cat and the baboon. As they say about old man river:"

"He don't plant 'tatos/ Don't plant cotton/ Them that plants them is soon
forgotten/ But old man river he just keeps rollin' along"
