# From the other side of the bridge

There’s a story about William Gibson’s jacket. In his book _Pattern
Recognition_ he confabulates a jacket for the protagonist, Cayce, in a
colourway that never existed.

The manufacturer, getting requests from fans for this fictional jacket,
approaches Gibson, and together they create the jacket for real. Gibson
himself has a custom version. Here’s his telling from 2005:

I received a very puzzled letter from the folks at Buzz Rickson’s, who had
been getting requests for black MA-1’s. Once I had explained what was
happening, they amazed and delighted me by asking my permission to make a
repro of _Cayce’s_ jacket, to market as their Pattern Recognition model. Yes
indeed, I said, and while you’re at it, cut me one with an extra four inches
in the back, please. Which they did, and it’s over the back of a chair nearby
as I write this. I love this jacket. It reminds me of the title of a
Surrealist sculpture, **“An Object From The Other Side Of The Bridge”.** It’s
real, but it emerged from a work of fiction.

So I’d forgotten this story. Then read it again this week in [Pfeil Magazine
12](https://montezpress.com/catalogue/pfeil/economy/) which I received as part
of my [Stack magazines](https://www.stackmagazines.com) subscription (I’ve
signed up to get a different magazine each month, their choice).

That piece in the magazine _(for completeness[here’s a
pic](https://www.instagram.com/p/CBQ2gpbpoOG/))_ also used that phrase "an
object from the other side of the bridge"

and

it totally

ate my brain.

What I hadn’t realised, before looking up Gibson’s telling of the story, is
that the phrase is taken from the name of a sculpture. Which I would now like
to see.

Here’s the sculpture: [De l’autre côté du
pont](http://www.doddsnet.com/Tanguy/Moma_1955/1930s/Default.htm), _“From the
Other Side of the Bridge,”_ Yves Tanguy, 1936.

Now, I’ve written before about [fiction and inner and outer
realities](/home/2017/09/01/bladerunner) but this feels… different, somehow?
More ouroboros. More like magick: speaking as a way of forming the universe.

A crossing between the fictional realm and our world! I mean, an invention in
fiction is also an invention in our world, of course.

But there’s something special, here, about the way the object can only be
_reached_ via first constructing the ENTIRE FICTIVE UNIVERSE, thus writing it
into being, and that process has to be conducted from our side of course; like
projecting a hologram from a laser-engraved lens, but once inscribed you can
step into the hologram and – _grab it._

Like searching for a particular item in a dream, and waking with it in your
hands.

Both the molecular structure of benzene and the molecular structure of DNA
were brought back from dreams.
