# A fantasy of a glitch in the universe

I have this fantasy that one day we’ll find the glitch that cracks this whole
thing open.

Which is why [I picked up on retroactive prayer](/home/2020/09/16/fanboost)
last month. Which is why I like the idea that we might discover [cold
fusion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cold_fusion). Or that law-of-momentum-
violating [resonant cavity drive](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EmDrive) for
spaceships. Or the [Global Consciousness
Project](http://noosphere.princeton.edu).

Because _of course not_ but also, preceding that, just briefly, _what if…_

The fantasy is that we’ll one day do something like be able to mathematically
model the entire social flow of the world, like we can map the flows of
knowledge like it’s the weather or something, and it’ll turn out there’s some
grain unaccounted for, that there is new knowledge that silently appears with
no apparent source – and then we’ll discover, in that gap, that the internet
has come to life and is talking to us anonymously; or that inspiration is a
particle carried by cosmic rays.

Or that if you shape a piece of potassium into a very specific solid, it cuts
a hole in the universe that we can see through at faster than the speed of
light, or perhaps free energy pours out.

What it must have been like with the [ultraviolet
catastrophe](https://medium.com/@falsabeh/the-unsolvable-problem-that-
foreshadowed-quantum-mechanics-c43c46686270) in 1900 – the innocuous unsolved
problem that, cracked open, led to quantum mechanics and 20th century physics!
The closest I’ve been to something like this was when our lecture notes were
out of date because they’d just discovered that neutrinos have mass.

The specific moment is when I feel: whoa, we don’t know why that happens, and
what’s more, everything else still works but we no longer know how.

I’m not hung up on it. I know that dreams of cold fusion won’t hold up to
scrutiny. One of my favourite moments from my undergrad was early on, when
there was great furore about the possibility of desktop, room temperature
fusion, based on the Fleischmann-Pons “discovery” of anomalous excess heat.
Based on what they found, there was this possibility that a particular
electrode treated in a particular way would just somehow cause water to
undergo fusion and emit energy. Some novel surface physics perhaps? I asked my
tutor about it and he was dismissive.

“But surely,” I said, “there’s the possibility. We don’t know how, and it
shouldn’t work… but there’s the possibility! And if it worked! We have to be
open to these things, even if we think they _shouldn’t_ happen.”

My tutor was still dismissive. So I pushed: “Why? Why dismiss it? How do you
know that cold fusion doesn’t happen like this?”

“Because I tried it,” he said. And it turned out that he’d got a pre-press
copy of the paper, and got hold of the particular materials, and replicated
the setup, and he didn’t get the same result.

And _that_ was a formative moment for me. It taught me that it’s safe to
embrace credulity in the imagination, because that doesn’t stop you verifying
with your hands.

Anyway: there’s still that feeling, before finding out that the world hasn’t
turned upside-down.

That 500 milliseconds, or a day, or a week, before it’s proved that, no,
[neutrinos don’t break the speed of light in
Italy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Faster-than-light_neutrino_anomaly), and
there was never a fracture in the universe after all, that moment just before
the spell is broken: it’s magical.

The pleasure in believings - just for that single second - in [aliens on
Venus](/home/2020/09/23/venus), or a wedge that opens up a faster-than-light
data ansible, and what it might mean… both for our understanding of the
universe, but also what we can do with it… suddenly knowing nothing but
simultaneously knowing something new… and in that second there are galactic
societies and starships, there’s psychic communion with animals, there are
discovies to be made and adventures to be had.

It’s the fairy story of it. It’s being at the top of a roller coaster and
beginning to drop. And when I peep down into those “what if” cracks I find joy
and my imagination.

So I hunt out the cracks, even though they’re never real and I know they’re
never real, and I nurture my credulity.
