# The visual affordances of touchscreen-enabled gloves

I got some new gloves for Christmas. Thanks!

The first finger and thumb are made of a slightly shinier leather. I just
noticed, I’ve been wearing them through this cold snap.

So I tried those fingers on my phone – they’re capacitive touch enabled.

And there I’ve been the last few days, putting on and taking off my gloves
like a chump.

(The other fingers don’t work on my touchscreen which in retrospect is odd
because, as I say, the gloves are leather and meat usually works on screens.
Try some chorizo next chance you get. Anyway, so the leather curing process
means that the gloves default to not working on my iPhone, then some secondary
process re-enables the tips of two digits.)

Well I should have expected it.

Even my kid’s wool gloves have little grey coloured patches on the first
finger and thumb to show where they are touch-enabled.

Putting aside my immediate reaction - _we got those gloves when she was 4! She
doesn’t have a phone!_ \- I wonder what the thinking is behind using grey to
communicate the touch affordance?

I learn towards “grey as in touched a lot” because my Christmas gloves are
matt leather and the fingertips for my phone have been made _glossy._ And
glossy is what leather gets when regularly touched.

So the fabric has been given a pre-worn look. Like a worn patch on a door that
shows that people have historically pushed it, and so I can push it too. But
here it’s deliberate: the material has “rehearsed” touching and that material
muscle memory transmits to me visually.

To perceive something is to get ready to act with it; seeing a mug handle
makes your hand-grabbing neurons warm up. That’s how visual affordances work.
It happens deep in the brain, I don’t want to have to _comprehend_ my gloves,
or _remember_ what functionality they have, in the moment. Shiny leather
patches it is then. Smart.

Design eh!

ASIDE:

If you’re ancient enough to remember the original click wheel iPod (sigh)
you’ll remember that when it switched from a mechanical wheel to being solid-
state and touch-enabled, the designers also changed it from white to grey. [I
wrote about why at Mind Hacks in
2005](https://mindhacks.com/2005/01/05/waving-not-designing/):

The scrollwheel is a dirty grey. It looks like it has been touched a lot. It
looks rubbery (although it’s not). It communicates the affordance of doing
something when touched and dragged.

What is the feature called? I checked a couple brands.

Uniqlo doesn’t even mention it. But if you look at their gloves online (except
for the cheapest and the specialist gloves) then the relevant finger pads do
indeed look different.

Hugo Boss, higher end: they say "TOUCHSCREEN-FRIENDLY FINGERTIPS." It’s tucked
away in the product description, no biggie.

Now Alibaba. Let’s see what the factories say.

There are generic glove suppliers and also glove suppliers who are trying to
“sell” the product. This is the copy they use:

Features: touchscreen, cold proof, windproof, lightweight

What I’ve learnt:

I like to be reminded that standard clothes change over time.

Anything that I take for granted really. I find it hopeful to remember that
the apparently permanent world is constructed. Clothes are a mesofact.

What other changes are coming?

Maybe in the future we’ll have winter coats with hoods big enough to
accommodate our always-worn VR headsets.

Or special clips on our shoes to snap-fit onto motorised accelerators that
everyone will own by then. Hoverboards or robot boots, I assume something like
that.

But then features become vestigial.

The touchscreen fingertips on gloves will remain, years beyond us using
capacitive touchscreens. Perhaps they won’t even work, it’ll just be the
colour or the gloss.

We’ll look at the shiny leather finger pads and see them in the same category
as the hoop on the side of my trousers for, well I don’t know what it’s for,
carrying a hammer? It likely has some brand identity purpose now. Or a lapel
button hole which is stitched closed now and I don’t know what its original
utility was – for a buttonhole flower? Flowers were a sophisticated
communications technology once up a time.

Or the little square pocket which is mandatory on jeans.

You never use it and one day you do and then you forget about a coin or
something that ends up breaking your washing machine. It’s hazardously
vestigial, the appendix of jeans.

The johnny pocket we used to call it as teens in the 90s. Perhaps it was
wildly high tech for something or other in the 1850s? Don’t abandon your
family to join a frenzied gold rush without it.
