# Pantheons of gods map to the shapes of complex systems

It would be interesting to do an analysis of the personalities of ancient
gods, correlating that with a folk understand of the dynamical systems that
they each represent.

Magic was functional (that is always my starting point). That is to say:
spells, predicting the future, witches, etc, had some kind of useful function
in society. The practise of magic was efficacious. Likewise: pantheons of
ancient gods.

Looking at the gods, they represent powerful forces that shape the world that
we live in – war, love, the sea, harvest, parties, hunting, and so on.

These aren’t distant and asymmetric systems of force that affect us but we
can’t affect them, like the weather, at least pre Industrial Revolution. (BUT!
We can control the impact of weather fluctuations _on us,_ to a degree, even
if we can’t control the weather itself – being cautious with food stores means
rain variation matter less, for example. And large forests seem to promote
rainfall; the climate has always been interactive, and you bet humans learnt
those geoengineering feedback loops over tens of thousands of years.)

War, love, the sea. These are systems that, in the ancient world, there was
limited capability to gather information about, beyond immediate sight, but
they none-the-less responded in _typical_ if not predictable ways.

Say: war. The complex system of “war” is capricious and hot-headed. Long-term
thinking and a combination of continuous diplomacy and strength (even when
there is no obvious purpose) pays dividends, or at least maintains the peace.
It always serves to be slightly more paranoid than necessary, because in the
low likelihood that war _does_ blow up, the consequences are so terrible. So
it’s better to appease faint signals now rather than thoughtfully respond to
hard data later.

Now, from what little I remember about the ancient gods, does that sound like
the character of Mars, god of war? Dunno, vaguely… more reading required.

Here’s my hunch:

Model the complex system, and pick out a bunch of metrics. SUCH AS…
volatility, steepness of the reward/risk severity curve, response
predictability, and so on.

Then map these onto the psychology of individuals, using say the [Big Five
personality traits](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Five_personality_traits)
(agreeableness, neuroticism, and the others) since those seem pretty
universally cover the phase space of human character.

If I’m right, then treating the abstract complex system as an individual
person is a effective heuristic for successful interaction with the system
itself.

To test this with another force:

Venus may have a character that rewards risk! To appease Vulcan, it may be
especially important to build a reputation for reliability and consider your
hammer-blows with care! (Success in blacksmithery is as much about building a
business from the opaque complex system of reputation, as the complex system
of shaping iron.)

Success in these realms is often called _“luck”_ and that’s a good way to
encapsulate the highly varied system response. But it’s the luck of the gods.
If you acted in such a way as to _please Mars_ (or rather, the priests of
Mars), would you be lucky in matters of war? I suspect you would.

This throws light on the role of the institutions and people around the
ancient gods – it doesn’t make sense to consider “gods” separately from their
interfaces. As previously discussed, [ancient magicians were management
consultants](/home/2020/10/05/birds) _(October 2020)._ So how do we interpret
priests?

Jump forward 2,000 years to the present day; think of the ways we understand
complex systems today. The functional mechanism to model, say, the economy is
_not_ the equations. Sure there are equations and frameworks, but these are
accessed always via _economists_ – actual human people who have knowledge of
the available frameworks, who know which to choose, who choose how to evolve
them, and who have built expertise (or rather, an intuition) in how the
economy behaves.

Economists are the priesthood of the economy.

Just as meteorologists are a priesthood of the weather, and Donald Rumsfeld
and Henry Kissinger were Mars’ high priests of war – sorry, _geopolitics._

So in a way we’re no different from the ancient Romans. We no longer refer to
our gods as gods, but we still have our mix of formal and intuitive
understandings of complex forces in the world, and we still have our
priesthoods.
