# Post at 11.21, on Saturday 22 Jan 2011

Google appears to have a problem with its search results this month. They're
filled with rubbish, and people are beginning to notice. [Google acknowledge
the problem.](http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2011/01/google-search-and-search-
engine-spam.html "Matt Cutts on the official Google blog.") What I hadn't
realised is that many of the rubbish results come from a small group of
companies. Each of these companies is a "content farm" -- they identify what
people are searching for online (eg, "winter tires") and then write articles
relevant to that topic (eg, how to put snow tires on your car). Then they sell
ads around those articles, and collect money. [The biggest of these content
farms is Demand Media.](http://gigaom.com/2011/01/21/google-war-demand-media-
ipo/ "A great piece of analysis.")

This is the future of journalism!

It's so incredibly responsive. Imagine if Hollywood could turn out emo horror
romance films immediately the vampire craze started. Or that, leafing through
the Times or the Guardian or the Economist, the newspaper could magically
sense your interests and create analysis and reportage dedicated just to you.

What's lame (of course) is that Demand Media's articles are _no good._ Here's
[their low-down on buying snow tires:](http://www.ehow.com/how_2063950_buy-
snow-tires.html "Demand Media own eHow.") "Invest some time in comparison
shopping. Prices for snow tires differ by retailer as well as region. Make use
of the Internet, clubs and department stores in addition to tire dealerships."
Well _no shit._ There's technically nothing wrong with what these articles
say, but you get a vague sense of wrongness when reading them, like when
you're talking to a super articulate idiot and you can't quite put your finger
on _why_ they're an idiot. But you know.

[Google's search technology](http://www.google.com/corporate/tech.html "Corporate page.") uses 200 signals to rank one result above another. Signals
like "page rank" (how many important web pages link to this page) and title
text are important. But these signals evidently aren't enough to weed out the
dross.

One big new Google innovation is [Social
Search.](http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2009/10/introducing-google-social-
search-i.html "Announcement.") This is the idea that your friends will have
more relevant answers for you than the average of the entire rest of the web.
Social is big! It's why Facebook is so exciting.

But there's another signal Google need: _taste._ The difference between a good
article and a sophisticated spam article is no longer anything simple like
number of linking, or quality of spelling. It's something weird and human.
It's the quality that editors of newspapers have, and that every single person
has very strongly in very individual areas, and some of it is personal and
some of it is universal.

And I've no idea how they'll do it, but it's required. Search engines need to
acquire a sense of taste.
