# Post at 18.13, on Friday 4 Mar 2011

_Google_

[Origin of the name
"Google":](http://graphics.stanford.edu/~dk/google_name_origin.html "Wow, on
the old Stanford site.") "Sean and Larry were in their office, using the
whiteboard, trying to think up a good name - something that related to the
indexing of an immense amount of data. Sean verbally suggested the word
"googolplex," and Larry responded verbally with the shortened form, "googol"
(both words refer to specific large numbers). Sean was seated at his computer
terminal, so he executed a search of the Internet domain name registry
database to see if the newly suggested name was still available for
registration and use. Sean is not an infallible speller, and he made the
mistake of searching for the name spelled as "google.com," which he found to
be available. Larry liked the name, and within hours he took the step of
registering the name "google.com" for himself and Sergey (the domain name
registration record dates from September 15, 1997)."

_Baidu_

_Baidu_ is Google's competitor in China, and is the 6th most popular site in
the world.

[Origin of the name
"Baidu":](http://ir.baidu.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=188488&p=irol-homeprofile "The
Baidu Story.") "'Baidu' was inspired by a poem written more than 800 years ago
during the Song Dynasty. The poem compares the search for a retreating beauty
amid chaotic glamour with the search for one's dream while confronted by
life's many obstacles. '...hundreds and thousands of times, for her I searched
in chaos, suddenly, I turned by chance, to where the lights were waning, and
there she stood.' Baidu, whose literal meaning is hundreds of times,
represents persistent search for the ideal."

Beautiful.

Incidentally, Baidu's city maps in China are all [super-cute pixelated 3D
cartoons of themselves.](http://gizmodo.com/#!5773531/china-just-won-simcity-
with-censorship+bypassing-3d-baidu-maps "Isometric SimCity maps.") ~~Here's
one place I found:[a miniature Eiffel Tower, next to a dense urban city
hive.](http://j.map.baidu.com/Gy6C "Baidu city map.")~~ _[Huh, my link stopped
working.]_ It's like browsing the future dressed up as a children's game.
