# Meat and gratitude

There’s a bunch of fuss about Beyond Burger rn regarding

I’m excited about these new vegan burgers because

BUT: thought experiment:

Why my remaining discomfort? Because animals are, well, animals. They’re
people too. I’ve known a bunch of animals, and we’re all people in different
ways. That fact is hard to reconcile with eating them.

For me, I do continue to eat meat (although less than I used). But I think a
lot of my discomfort around it - environmentally, the agro-industry, health -
is _displacement_ from the hard-to-digest fact that, when I’ve met a cow,
they’re super nice to hang out with, and I could see us being friends. And
that feeling isn’t going to go away.

I have a hunch that our inability to deal with the immensity of this _gift_ \-
this animal-person who has been killed so I can have my dinner - means that,
either deep down or out loud, we end up denying there’s a gift or any kind of
trade-off at all, hence the tribalism, and lack of sensible discussion, around
the adjacent topics of health, carbon, and so on.

The slip-sliding and dissembling around health benefits/carbon/etc makes me
think that a bigger issue is being psychologically avoided. And for me, maybe
that issue is _“meat tastes great”_ vs _“holy shit animals are people too”_
which is so hard to reconcile that it gets repressed, and repressed feelings
come out in weird ways.

I like that being vegan is a movement, in a way that being vegetarian was a
movement in the 1980s, or Atkins in the early 2000s. These are lifestyle
choices that bring alignment with the body and the planet by promoting
practice changes and introducing a new kind of mindfulness.

Could there be a similar movement that embraces some of the logic behind the
Beyond Burger, but _also_ includes meat?

Here’s my suggestion:

I am [a big believer in vocalised
gratitude](http://interconnected.org/home/2017/08/25/gratitude) as a means
towards mindfulness, but mainly towards being able to accept the weight,
meaning, obligation, and reciprocity of a gift.

Once gratitude is internalised and the gift of sacrifice is accepted, I’ve a
feeling that the rest will fall into place. In short: a more balanced
relationship between the food we need to live as individuals, and the planet
we need to live together.

Ok so this is just saying grace. But oriented towards the animal.

I wonder if there could be a single phrase which expresses gratitude for the
gift?

And something, unlike the traditional and passive "For what we are about to
receive…", that acknowledges my actions and choices that have brought about
this meal of meat and all that it required? Said out loud, it would promote
discussion and maybe even spread…

Grativore!
