# Gratitude and a possibly inappropriate technological intervention

I was reading [Melanie Klein’s](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Melanie_Klein)
_Envy and Gratitude and Other Works_ (which I still haven’t finished) and
there’s something about [Kleinian
gratitude](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kleinian_envy_and_gratitude) which is
"crucial in developing the primal relationship between mother (the good
object) and child. It is also the basis for the child perceiving goodness in
others and herself."

_Conscious_ gratitude seems to be more focused on the other, rather than a
self-centred idea of being the cause of goodness or its reverse. Developing
gratitude might allow for greater capacity for appreciation, acceptance, and
the sharing of love.

Gratitude is inherently outwards looking. And surprisingly hard! It touches
all kinds of other feelings like deservedness, and is easily corrupted with
responses like entitlement.

So I was thinking: a habit of gratitude would be an interesting thing to
foster. Gratitude being a component of prayer, I know, but I don’t pray. So. I
need to get it somewhere else.

Anyway.

_We can fix this with technology._ I know, I know. Forgive me.

What I do is I have a folder in [Ulysses](https://ulyssesapp.com), which is a
writing app I have on my iPhone (and I [use for
everything](http://interconnected.org/home/2015/12/22/ulysses)). The folder is
called: _What I Am Grateful For._

Please also forgive the ugly dangling preposition. It upsets me too.

In that folder are tons of notes. Each note has a date, and a line of text:
the thing I am grateful for that day. Sometimes big, mostly small. Sometimes
easy to observe, sometimes really, really difficult. Always interesting to
note when I’m going through a phase in which gratitude is a challenge to
attain, and with what that correlates.

Back to the tech.

Once a day, at midday, I get a notification which says “What are you grateful
for today?” I tap the notification, and a text box opens up on my phone. I
type into the text box and it gets saved into the folder.

Here’s how that bit of automation works:

Cross-app automation is a nascent but interesting area. I’m finding myself
able to do pretty complex workflows from my phone now (I also have a process
to edit and deploy code, using multiple different apps). It’s got a way to go
as a pattern of user behaviour, but I’d like to see iOS or Android take
automation more seriously. To see where it could go. It has a different nature
to automation on PCs, and I think there’s the opportunity for these automation
scripts to unbind from the smartphone and move into the cloud (somehow). Maybe
use a bit more intelligence too. [Centaur
automation.](https://magicalnihilism.com/2016/03/31/centaurs-not-butlers/)

Yeah but so: gratitude.

To receive - and to be open to receiving! - something which is good, and to
take in that goodness and to internalise it, but to also appreciate the
goodness itself, and its source and the source’s reasons. A tricky business.

I don’t even pretend to have even half a handhold on Klein, or Kleinian
gratitude, or hell even gratitude, but her words opened something in me.
(Thanks!)
