# Grocery shopping, localism, and last mile delivery

I wanted to scribble some notes about grocery shopping because how we’re doing
in, in our home, has changed a bunch over the 10 weeks of lockdown, and I want
to remember this.

PREVIOUSLY how it worked:

NOW it looks like

We have a month planner whiteboard magnetically attached to the fridge. We use
it to plan childcare, and it also shows the use-by dates of everything in the
fridge.

This style of shopping suits me very well. This is what we should have been
doing, always.

Incidentally the layout of these ex-cafes, now local flour depots, is worth
recording.

It’s one in, one out with a socially distanced queue outside. Inside, the old
cafe space is half available goods, and half stockroom. Goods include bread,
pasta, granola, that kind of thing, plus re-bagged flour. You stack your goods
on a table in-front of the till, and pay contactless using the card machine
which is also placed on that table.

This is great for us: there’s a new local website called [Dulwich
Delivers](https://dulwichdelivers.com) which simply lists local businesses
that deliver. Aside from that, we mostly find out about places from friends on
WhatsApp, or by checking out favourite spots on social media to find out if
they’re active.

The cafe I mentioned where we get our flour posts their price list and
availability as a photo on their Facebook page. They take orders for delivery
by Messenger, then call you up to take your credit card details.

The local toyshop delivers, and the person who does the deliveries _is the
proprietor, on her bike._

For us, a lot of this has happened by necessity.

We don’t have (or want) a car.

Online supermarket delivery slots were _barely_ available to us for the first
month or two of the lockdown. The slots we did manage to get, we mainly used
to set up deliveries to our parents. So we had to find other sources of
groceries.

What’s fascinating to me is when I think about the e-commerce stack, loosely:

These are the three big challenges that any only shop needs to find an answer
to, either by doing it themselves, using software, or partnering.

Amazon’s big play is **discovery** \- they have all the buyers in one place,
so if you’re a seller, that’s where you go to. Then they handle the store
operations and delivery for you.

Or then there’s Shopify, which is really challenging Amazon now. Primarily
they provide **store operations.** Their realisation was that shops can handle
their own discovery, on Facebook or otherwise. After all, stores have been
doing marketing and customer relationship longer than e-commerce has been
around.

Now Facebook has launched Facebook Shops, which looks after discovery and a
little bit of store operations, partnering with Shopify for the rest. Ben
Thompson (Stratechery) [calls this the Anti-Amazon
Alliance](https://stratechery.com/2020/platforms-in-an-aggregator-world/).

BUT WHAT’S MISSING HERE is **_local_ delivery.** Last mile delivery. Facebook
Shops/Shopify is fine… but it doesn’t do anything for my local butcher with
their meat box. Amazon is fine, but it’s optimised for centralised warehouses,
not local.

This matters because, when I think about how “discovery” has worked for us,
Facebook or no, it has been local first. I always say, word of mouth is
unreasonably effective. And word of mouth works best when it’s local.

So “discovery” works locally but “delivery” doesn’t. Hm. Hm.

A few weeks ago I posted about [hyperlocal, distributed supply
chains](/home/2020/04/01/supply_chains), and that got me into a really
interesting Twitter DM conversation with Karl from
[Bloop](https://bloopbristol.com), a zero-waste store in Bristol.

They’ve been going for a few months, and are well-known by the local community

- and (quoting from our chat) "We didn’t intend to do things online, but the
  viral outbreak forced us into that, so now we’re a delivery company too." The
  website is an attractive, modern, e-commerce experience.

And I find that really intriguing. **What if e-commerce, but only for a 1 mile
radius?**

Karl shared a few more details. They live above the shop, and he also runs
[Obelisk](http://obeliskmusic.com) which is an audio design agency. Karl has
made all his own furniture for the store and it’s all [on castor
wheels](https://bloopbristol.com/pages/about) so the space can be easily
reconfigured.

_(I wrote recently about[homes can also be
businesses](/home/2020/04/02/new_rooms) so you can see why this appeals.)_

Also quoting Karl: "What comes with having a shop like this is a golden ticket
into community" \- which is amazing, right? You can see the effect you’re
having, identify that delivery is a need, spread the word, and come face to
face with users (customers!) every day.

So when I think about local delivery, this is where the rubber hits the road
for all of this e-commerce stuff. Because it’s necessarily physical, it’s the
sole opportunity to be face to face. But delivery, when commoditised and
industrialised, also seems to be where things go badly wrong, from [delivery
drivers bearing the risk of whole corporations](/home/2014/12/30/city_link) to
food delivery _“independent contractors”_ barely able to make minimum wage,
and being stiffed for tips.

The big question:

Corporations and startups will inevitably move hard into the **last mile
delivery** space. How do we make sure it’s not shit?

It’s going be…

I can imagine a utopian neighbourhood of cheery teenagers on their bikes
earning pocket money by delivering my veg box and fancy cheese ordered via
Facebook Messenger, and me tipping an extra shilling because I recognise them
from last week. But this isn’t 1955 plus social media.

So what is it? How do we make sure it isn’t awful?

I find it hard to imagine utopias, because I’m in the habit of imagining
critiques or dystopias or semi-plausible extrapolations of the present. A
utopia is a non-extrapolation; it implies some intervention. Politics. I’m not
very good at imagining politics.

Science fiction is pretty good at dystopias, it’s not in the habit of utopias
either, any longer. And design fiction is good at depicting futures, but
design is (inherently, and rightly) commercial, so design fiction’s futures
aren’t about utopias but about desire.

I think we need to - _I need to_ \- imagine utopias again, and we need to
articulate them in great detail, and illustrate everyday situations like this,
and we need to _demand_ and _create_ demand for them, because if we don’t then
the clearest narrative wins, and currently the clearest narrative is race-to-
the-bottom capitalism in the guise of opportunity-for-all.

I’ve had a taste of collectivism and localism these last few weeks, and I
don’t want to lightly let it go.
