# Hamlet and Star Wars and what fiction is

Look, _Hamlet._ _Hamlet_ is such a non-nonsensical story. All rational, makes
sense, about feelings, betrayal, etc. I must have written a dozen essays on
Oedipal blahblahblah. Yet the play opens with them meeting a ghost! What is
that?? What gets me is I’ve never questioned this, it fits with the narrative
so well. So what are we seeing – is the ghost some manifestation of the group
unconsciousness, the reaction of the court to the actions of the king and
queen so totally repressed that the only way it can come out is as a _thing_
with its own body and agency, independent from any individual? And why have I
overlooked this so far? Is it because when I read about the ghost in _Hamlet_
I accept it because honestly that’s just how things are: The world is
inhabited by us and _also_ by these forces that emerge from us all, but are
claimed by no-one… and so we treat them as if they are real even though they
aren’t? I don’t know. But the ghost isn’t a chorus… it’s not part of the
staging. The guards meet the ghost! Hamlet meets the ghost!

Oh gosh now [here’s a thing:](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ghost_(Hamlet)>)
"the Ghost was originally played by Shakespeare himself."

… which reminds me of _2001: A Space Odyssey_ and the way the Monolith is the
shape of the cinema screen itself, and most of the shots seems practically
built to remind you that (a) the screen has edges where we are and so via the
Monolith we intrude, and (b) that the director is behind the camera and has a
viewpoint somethingsomething

… and I’m reminded of the astounding [stage adaption of His Dark
Materials](http://www.bridgetothestars.net/index.php?d=stage) in which black-
clad puppeteers controlled the character’s omnipresent animal familiars -
fading from our notice during the first 3 hour part of the play - and then in
the second segment, they visit the underworld, and are told that we are
followed around the whole time by our own death, always there, always
invisible, at which point the puppeteers _remove their masks._ Tingles.

somethingsomething a crack between our world and the fiction world

_(I have an assumption that authors and directors are all always talking about
the weird timelessness of fiction and the roles of the author and
spectator/reader, because that’s the world THEY inhabit. Even, I don’t know,
Greg Egan with[Schild’s
Ladder](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schild%27s_Ladder) which is the hardest
of hard sci-fi, could he be any more preoccupied with the nature of crafting a
story and how it gets in and out of the page? The entire thing is a metaphor
down to the new bubble universe being like the solid pages of a book, and the
spaceships weaving themselves like story being constructed letter by letter.)_

… and somethingsomething I’m reminded of [this 2005 piece about Star
Wars](%20http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/dvdextras/2005/11/star_wars_episodesivi.html)
and what The Force _really_ is. Being:

the characters come to understand that there is another agent, external to
themselves, that is dictating the action. Within the films’ fiction, that
force is called … er, “the Force.” It’s the Force that makes Anakin win the
pod race so that he can get off Tatooine and become a Jedi and set all the
other events in all of the other films in motion. We learn that Anakin’s
birth, fall, redemption, and death are required to “bring balance to the
Force” and, not coincidentally, to give the story its dramatic shape.

And so, yes:

"The Force is, in other words, a metaphor for, or figuration of, the demands
of narrative. The Force is the power of plot."

There’s a ghost in _Hamlet!_ The ghost was played by Shakespeare! Dunno, good
grief, I’m broken, draw your own conclusions.
