# Post at 12.32, on Monday 7 Feb 2011

Theo Janson makes massive mechanical animal skeletons that walk, with dozens
of legs, along the beach, powered by the wind:
[Strandbeest](http://www.strandbeest.com/ "Pretty things.") (there are
videos).

On a smaller scale, here is a video of a [hamster/mechanical walker
hybrid.](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A3iP0NGDDao "Hamster batteries.") A
tabletop walking skeleton, with a hectic hamster racing in a ball as a
mechanical battery.

(Related: [a dog in a man suit.)]( "Drawn full size on a whiteboard.")

I like the idea of exoskeletons or hybrids. The parasite _Dicrocoelium
dendriticum_ has the ability to [control the habits of
ants](http://dailyparasite.blogspot.com/2010/08/august-10-dicrocoelium-
dendriticum.html "Via infection.") to make them climb blades of grass (to be
eaten by sheep).

There's a virtual reality system called
[CAVE.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cave_Automatic_Virtual_Environment "A
room with video.") It's a room you go into, and video is projected on the
walls, the ceiling, and floor. Computers monitor how you move, and so the
video can respond to your movements. You could feel like you were standing in
a ballroom, or a forest, or a computer-generated architecture. I heard about
this application of it: the CAVE would monitor your head rotation, but move
the video twice as much. So if you turned your head 10 degrees to the right,
it would whizz the video round 20 degrees. If you looked directly right, over
your shoulder, it would turn the video so it was as if you were looking
directly _behind you._ Apparently you get used to it really fast.

So I wonder: could you make a helmet like this? It would have cameras on top,
and you would look at a screen inside, but it would use gyroscopes to move the
cameras twice as fast as you moved your head, so it would feel like you could
turn your head all the way round. _Owl helmet!_

_Superpowers for animals_

Horseshoes give the superpower of walking on hard surfaces to horses. But what
if you gave [neutral buoyancy in
air](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jPGgl5VH5go "Air penguins.") to sheep, or
the [magical sensation of magnetic
north](http://sensebridge.net/projects/northpaw/ "Northpaw superpower.") to
cattle, or [gecko shoes](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ECpY2N5rgcM "Climbing
dogs.") to dogs? What if dogs could stick to walls and ceilings?

(Naturally related: [Chris Woebken's series of prosthetics to give animal
abilities to humans.](http://chriswoebken.com/animalsuperpowers.html "RCA
designer") Lovely photos. Lovely objects.)
