# Hardware coffee morning

I think it was the week before last, I had just got back from holiday, and I
had three meetings with hardware startups, all wanting to talk through what
they were doing, and each at a different stage. Some of what we were talking
about was startup stuff - like, what to do first - and some was technical
(what code should run where?) - and most of it was, you know, let’s just chat
through this.

It was fun for me for a couple of reasons. First because there is a [hardware
boom in London](http://www.wired.co.uk/magazine/archive/2014/10/start/london-
hardware-network) and that’s exciting. There are some great hardware-focused
meetups, and some good semi-private communities, but I find the chitter-
chatter especially enjoyable. The second reason is that, with [Berg gradually
taking less of my time,](http://blog.bergcloud.com/2014/09/09/week-483/) I
find myself (a) wanting to lend a hand, even in a small way, to people getting
going with products and hardware etc; and (b) missing hanging round smart
people with that particular bent and learning from them.

I guess that’s one of the things I love about hardware and the Internet of
Things and all that nonsense. You can go from embedded software to supply
chain via character design in a single conversation, and that appeals to my
Attention Gadabout Disorder.

So what I’m saying is, we should see more of each other.

I’m inspired by Russell Davies’ [coffee
mornings](http://russelldavies.typepad.com/planning/coffee_morning/) that he
did for a year or two back in 2006/7. A regular spot, an open door, and a good
crowd. Let’s do it!

**9.30am till whenever, Thursday 20th,[The Book
Club.](http://www.wearetbc.com)**

(3 days from now.)

I’m a bit of a morning person, sorry about that.

No agenda except coffee and hanging out. But if you’re into hardware (making
or manufacture), Internet of Things, knitting, shops, China, sending stuff
through the post, so on and so forth, please feel particularly welcome.
[Tom’s](http://tomtaylor.co.uk) coming along, it’d be lovely to see you too.
If it’s fun we’ll do it again.

Last Thursday’s [hardware-ish coffee
morning](/home/2014/11/17/hardware_coffee_morning) was fun. Lovely to spend
time with [Tom,](http://tomtaylor.co.uk) [Charles and
David,](http://www.winnowsolutions.com) [Daniel,](http://graftt.com)
[Alex,](http://alexfleetwood.com) [Dan,](http://www.iamdanw.com)
[Basil,](http://www.telescopecards.com) and [Ben.](http://knyttan.com) Thank
you for coming!

Although… Too Many Dudes. Something to fix for next time.

[Here’s a pic of our sign](http://instagram.com/p/vnkiudqpTh/?modal=true) to
alert people that this was a Coffee Morning With Intent.

And Ben is part of Knyttan which does on-demand knitted jumpers on industrial
knitting machines. [Here he is wearing the test
pattern,](http://instagram.com/p/vnfWVMKpS4/?modal=true) which had a lot of
fans.

So, what happened? We sat round a table and people chatted with people. Zero
structure, except for 5 minutes for everyone to say their names and what
they’re doing at moment (arcade machines, newspapers, jumpers, just
interested). Plus coffee. I think everyone left at about 11. I’m not sure what
everyone else discussed but I had a chat about telescopes and another about
what a “minimum viable product” is in hardware, and also I found out about a
hardware/making cluster at Somerset House, all of which was very enjoyable.

Conclusions. I like coffee and I like mornings and I liked chatting with
everyone. There will be another! Probably next week. I’ll let you know.
