# Thinking about the emerging landscape of AI hardware products

I’ve been looking at the landscape of AI hardware products. Will the future be
more like voice assistants that we talk to, or more like… well, something
else?

See, there’s been a flurry of AI hardware in consumer product.

**Assistants.**

Two products aim to be your smartphone replacement:

If iPad was dismissed as a “consumption device” versus general purpose
computing devices, these are both “service devices”. They’re made for ordering
cabs, booking restaurants, and automating sequenceable knowledge work tasks.

_(btw I am not super into the Humane AI Pin overall but I do wish my phone had
a green laser projector that I could play with. So, so good.)_

Two other wearables:

I am into the ambition and experimentation here!

And, no, _“AI hardware”_ is not a product category, in the same way that voice
assistants like Amazon Echo aren’t really a category. You don’t buy them to be
a voice assistant, you buy them to be a kitchen timer or to play music or
whatever. A “smart speaker” is a speaker.

Yet these are all assistants in one way or another. Playing with the form
factor or the way it fits into your life.

So that’s potentially one end of the AI hardware spectrum.

**Non-assistants.**

Then there is AI hardware _without_ any kind of assistant.

Where the AI enables some other feature. The AI isn’t on the surface as the
user interface, it’s deep inside, embedded.

Ok, back to 2018:

Clips didn’t do so well – it’s almost impossible to invent new categories.

But I’m using it to illustrate this _embedded AI_ end of the spectrum. (And
the fact that Google did it on-device 6 years ago shows how long they’ve been
ahead with AI, even if that’s not quite so apparent today.)

**A typology of AI hardware features.**

To tease this space out a little further, _assistants_ bundle together two
separate AI-enabled features: new user interfaces, and new agentive (tool
using) abilities.

So I think we have a triangle ([ternary diagrams have been on my
mind](/home/2024/01/05/triangles)).

You could draw a triangular landscape between these extremes. All the products
I’ve mentioned could be plotted somewhere inside.

_Exercise for the reader: find the gaps and invent new products like planting
flowers…_

**Embedded AI.**

Me, I’m most interested when AI _isn’t_ an assistant.

The argument goes like this…

Moore’s Law cuts both ways:

If computers get 100 times more powerful over a decade, we can EQUIVALENTLY
say that computers get: 100 times smaller; or 100 times cheaper; or 100 times
more abundant.

This is what I’ve previously called [intelligence too cheap to
meter](/home/2023/10/06/ubigpt) – and what does it mean to have GPT-4-level
intelligence in any light switch, or behind every menu command in your notes
app, or your cat’s collar, or in your shoes, or quietly doing its job as a
[software universal coupling](/home/2023/02/07/braggoscope) or whatever?

Ubiquitous, embedded AI.

I called it [fractional artificial
intelligence](https://berglondon.com/talks/botworld/?slide=30) back in 2012:

We can be frivolous with mathematics, throw it around like confetti.

So I didn’t mean “fractional” as in dumb; only dumb compared to the giant
planet brains owned by Big AI. I meant… small and everywhere.

I had no idea in 2012 what the implications of intelligence too cheap to meter
would be, and I have no idea _now._

But I’m interested!

**Back to the poetry clock, of course.**

“Embedded AI” is the territory that I’m playing in with my rhyming clock.

_**Obligatory plug:** the Kickstarter pre-launch page has just opened! [Go
register your interest in
Poem/1!](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/genmon/poem-1-the-ai-poetry-
clock) Telling the time with a new poem every minute, composed by ChatGPT, and
a gorgeous e-paper screen! You’ll get a notification as soon as the campaign
opens next week._

The AI clock isn’t an assistant; it doesn’t have agentive capabilities to use
tools and do general purpose problem solving. It doesn’t respond to your
presence or requests or really any context at all except the time.

It’s an appliance.

_An AI-ppliance._ (Sorry.)

For all of it being “simply an appliance,” it’s weird to be in the same room
and hang out, let me tell you.

We are not accustomed to things like rhyming couplets emerging from a machine
poet. Poems are not used _decoratively,_ except made in cross-stitch and hung
on the wall. And yet! Here we are!

I think, with the poetry clock, it’s ambiguous whether there’s AI involved at
all. A human could quite possibly write a whole day of poems, one for every
minute, and then display them on a loop. It’s only the sheer infinity of it
that gives it away, and you only really appreciate _that,_ deep down, after
living with it.

It’s sort of human (but the words aren’t as good as a human poet would write),
sort of alien (it has inhuman endurance).

I think there will be a lot of this.

Insane AI, planetary compute, used for really, really mundane things.

**Sharing our planet with machine entities.**

There’s a great interview with Stanley Kubrick about the movie _2001: A Space
Odyssey_ ([previous discussed in 2014](/home/2014/11/12/filtered)).

One of the things we were trying to convey in this part of the film is _the
reality of a world populated - as ours soon will be - by machine entities who
have as much, or more, intelligence as human beings_ , and who have the same
emotional potentialities in their personalities as human beings.

And:

We wanted to stimulate people to think what it would be like to share a planet
with such creatures.

YES!

BUT!

I wonder whether the reality of a world populated with AI is not so much about
listening, watching, speaking, laser-projecting entities, assistants in our
pockets and hanging on necklaces and our every word - not JARVIS or HAL 9000
or Samantha or Joshua - but instead a trillion extremely mundane, genius-
level, nameless embedded intelligences, squirrelling away, hidden inside
everything?

And how will that work, practically? How will that technology be developed,
managed, maintained, secured, networked, owned, shared and made equitable?

And how will it feel to live there?
