# A love note to British hedges

_The New Yorker_ has a wonderful long interview with Melvyn Bragg, about his
life as a programme maker and public intellectual, and here he is talking
about the BBC’s competitors, and also hedges:

None of these people have the variety of programs, especially in radio, that
the BBC offers. They don’t even know how to do it. _England’s full of niche
audiences, like the old hedgerows full of different birds_ , and they’re all
singing away.

_(The density of England! See[this post about ancient
folktales](/home/2021/07/07/folktales) from last year.)_

Bragg is now 82. He upended arts programming. _The South Bank Show,_ 1978:

The first thing I’m going to do, we’re going to sit down in front of an artist
whose work we have researched thoroughly and talk to that artist about his or
her work. That’s going to be the main thing we do. And the second thing we’re
going to do is try to break the pyramid idea of the arts in this country,
where opera is best, ballet is best, classical music is best, and then down,
down, down. Pop music and comedy aren’t even on the pyramid. So we started
with Paul McCartney as our first program.

Something wonderful about this counterintuitive mix of populism, anti-populism
(deep interviews), and going to the source instead of pundits with opinions. A
lesson there I think.

Bragg now makes _In Our Time,_ which I love and which is the BBC’s biggest
podcast. It’s a wildly eclectic discussion show featuring people who know
their stuff and there’s a different topic every week.

I had about five or six rules. I’m not having people talk about different
subjects; I’m having people talking about one subject the entire time. I’m
having academics, but they’re going to be teaching academics, so they’re used
to clarifying things-not dumbing them down. I wanted to be eclectic, and I
wanted to be collegiate. And I wanted to do things that I knew nothing about,
because I could get an education on the sly.

You know? I wanted to do astrophysics, which we did. I wanted to do
consciousness, neuroscience. I wanted to do stuff in China. I particularly
wanted to do stuff about the Middle East, because nobody was ever writing
about the great intellectuals from 700 to 1200 in the Middle East-Avicenna,
those sort of people. They couldn’t stop us, because we got this golden six-
month contract.

_In Our Time_ started in 1998. [Listen to all 955 episodes
here.](https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qykl) _([As previously
discussed.](/home/2017/12/21/filtered))_

ANYWAY: Melvyn Bragg’s mention of hedgerows.

Hedges cover the UK. There are urban hedges:

Welcome to Hedgeland. The streets of suburban Britain are edged with merry
green. Boxy bushes of privet, beech, holly, yew and other plant species act as
boundaries around gardens, demarcating property lines and separating our
domestic and public lives. Town planners call them “woody linear features,”
but they are so much more than that. They are a charmed circle drawn around
family and self. What the white picket fence is to America, the hedge is to
Britain, a cozy symbol of conservatism.

They are continuously trimmed and maintained by home-owners: "One begins to
suspect that hedges are psychological portraits of those who live behind them.
A hedge left wild and overgrown suggests a certain lassitude, especially when
growing right next to one pruned with geometric rectitude."

Also, mainly, there are rural hedges.

Hedges enclose fields and have done in Britain since the Bronze Age, 4,000
years ago. They display ownership. Birds live in them. Worms live under them.
They prevent animals from wandering; they demarcate lanes for traffic. There
are 95,000 miles of hedge in the UK.

A hedge is not one thing.

A good hedgerow is a dense linear thicket of multiple plant species,
[including](https://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/trees-woods-and-
wildlife/habitats/hedgerows/): hawthorn, blackthorn, hazel, ash, oak. Urban
hedges: box, yew, privet, holly. The number of species can be used to date the
hedge:

Hooper’s rule (named for Dr. Max Hooper) is based on ecological data obtained
from hedges of known age, and suggests that the age of a hedge can be roughly
estimated by counting the number of woody species counted in a thirty-yard
distance and multiplying by 110 years.

There’s a caveat that hints at how ancient hedges can be: "The formula also
does not work on hedges more than a thousand years old."

I visited a Zen temple in Kyoto once upon a time, and saw the dry garden there
_(and had a deeply spiritual experience; a story for another time),_ raked and
maintained in its same form for hundreds and hundreds of years. Same same.
I’ll contemplate that, next time I look at a hedge.

There are hedges all over the world, but it’s hard not to see the centrality
of the hedge as a peculiarity of the geography and the culture of Britain.

SIMILARLY: Chalk streams, which I grew up surrounded by, and which formed the
archetype in my head for “what a stream is,” before I discovered that [chalk
streams are a peculiarity of the south of England](/home/2018/01/22/filtered)
_(2018)._

Hedges are simultaneously so mundane as to be invisible…

…yet also, if you were to look back on them in 10,000 years, investigating
hedges archeologically and anthropologically, they would be seen to have
enormous ritual significance:

Hedges wouldn’t grow naturally. They exist because we maintain them, and we
maintain them because they maintain us.

The society of hedges is in symbiosis not with individual humans but with
human society.

And, as Melvyn Bragg says, the ancient hedges sing. You can hear when you walk
past in the spring, quite often, the singers themselves invisible. Birdlife is
homed there, given nooks and niches to hide and nest, birdlife in all its
great variety preserved and protected in the long, low, dense wood and
foliage.

(A blog is a little like a hedgerow, perhaps. A continuously maintained
tangled thicket, linear through time, simultaneously selecting yet connecting;
a form that preserves variety; humble and multiple; enduring but fragile;
alive.)

**Update 11 July:** I’ve been thinking about hedges and about magic since
writing this post. If you were to observe the function of hedges without
_also_ the huge construct of the law, property rights and conventions, etc,
what you would see is humans creating a long linear plant around an area of
land, and tending it - spending effort on maintaining it - many times a year
for decades, and as a result some “un-permitted” class of people are thrown
out by force if they enter the enclosed land, and after a socially agreed
ritual these people may be locked up or otherwise punished, and society as a
whole agrees with this – well, it looks like magic. So perhaps we can say that
magic (or at least, one type of historical magic) is what it looks like when
you see someone interacting with a vast social construct where that construct
is now gone. Like a social-scale equivalent of watching someone’s bizarre
movements and hand actions when they’re in VR but you can’t see through the
glasses.
