# Thinking about the immortal cells of Henrietta Lacks

Who owns immortalised cell lines?

Henrietta Lacks (born Loretta Pleasant; August 1, 1920 – October 4, 1951) was
an African-American woman whose cancer cells are the source of the HeLa cell
line, the first immortalized human cell line and one of the most important
cell lines in medical research. An immortalized cell line reproduces
indefinitely under specific conditions, and the HeLa cell line continues to be
a source of invaluable medical data to the present day.

Genetically identical HeLa cells are cloned and used, for example, to test
whether some substance or another is carcinogenic.

[HeLa has also been…](https://www.technologynetworks.com/cell-
science/lists/5-contributions-hela-cells-have-made-to-science-305036)

The human use of human beings, eh. Blimey.

Hey, BUT

A biopsy was taken of the carcinoma on her cervix but, as was common practice
during the mid-20th century, the physicians involved did not obtain consent
from Henrietta before carrying out this procedure.

Nor was consent given to use the cells for research, nor for turning the cells
from the cancerous sample into an immortalised cell line. Not that consent was
required, according to policy, in 1951.

Eventually the cell line was sequenced, and then identification was swift.
From Wikipedia: "In March 2013, researchers published the DNA sequence of the
genome of a strain of HeLa cells. The Lacks family discovered this when the
author Rebecca Skloot informed them."

Get this: the fight about ownership was about _insurance premiums._

It was not until 2013 that the Lacks family were given any authority over the
use of the HeLa cell line – over half a century after Henrietta’s cells were
first used. This only occurred because of the publication of the HeLa genome
sequence, which raised multiple concerns among the Lacks family; _one of these
was the possibility of the sequence being used to calculate the family’s risk
of disease and the potential health insurance implications of this._

Looking up immortal cell lines on Ancestry.com is a thing now. I wonder how
that plays with GDPR.

Conclusion: two Lacks family members are now on a six-person committee that
regulates access to the genetic data.

_Ownership:_

Devil’s advocate… do we really have to treat the cell line taken from
Henrietta Lacks (admittedly without consent) as her property?

Might it be like the [monkey selfie property
dispute](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monkey_selfie_copyright_dispute)? Just
as the photographer created the necessary _conditions,_ but still didn’t end
up as the owner of the selfie, couldn’t you argue that Lacks created the
necessary _conditions_ for the cancerous cells, but ultimately doesn’t get to
own the Act of God that occured?

How much independent agency do we ascribe to a tumour?

_Precedent:_

What if it wasn’t a genome that was taken but a connectome? Let’s say
technology gets to the point where its possible to scan brains and run them in
software, say for 20 seconds at a time, in crowds of a million in parallel,
maybe to do rapid marketing surveys on AI-generated car adverts to figure out
which creates the right emotive response and purchase reflex? It’s just
software, right? Not the actual personality. But perhaps it’s just a little
bit sentient. Who knows.

I guess if _that_ comes to pass then it’s super important that we establish
the legal precedent _now_ that derivative works (such as a brain scan) are
“owned” by the originating body.

But then – what if you sign away the rights because money while you’re alive
is worth it? Maybe you shouldn’t be _allowed_ to sell your own afterlife, to
protect your eternity from the poor decisions made by your greedy original
meat self.

It would be a weird post-death existence to wake up as looping goldfish-
brained ad microtargeting engine sometime in the 2160s.

See you there I guess.

There is a sci-fi short about almost precisely this: _Lena_ by qntm, which is
written as a Wikipedia article.

_This article is about the standard test brain image. For the original human,
see Miguel Acevedo._

MMAcevedo (Mnemonic Map/Acevedo), also known as Miguel, is the earliest
executable image of a human brain. …

100% worth your time. **READ:[Lena.](https://qntm.org/mmacevedo)**

_Thank you David Turner ([@NovalisDMT](https://twitter.com/novalisdmt)) for
finding this from my vague description!_
