# Minecraft is haunted and Twitter too

It turns out that _Minecraft_ is haunted.

[Herobrine](https://minecraft.gamepedia.com/Herobrine) is "Notch’s dead
brother, somehow embedded into Minecraft." (Notch is the creator of the game.)

Herobrine appears as a _Minecraft_ character and "he stalks the player,
disappearing if approached."

And: "Herobrine shows a lot of characteristics of being a form of virus, such
as manipulating game worlds, deleting threads and sending messages through the
Minecraft Forums."

BUT: "Herobrine is not in unmodded _Minecraft,_ and never has been. There are
no references to him at all in the source code, and there is no code to allow
for any entity to act like Herobrine."

Does Herobrine play a social role?

I don’t know enough about _Minecraft_ to say. But here’s my guess. If there’s
a group of 10 year olds playing together, and somebody messes with someone
else’s favourite construction while they’re offline, or messes with their
_own_ stuff and regrets it, or leaves a rude message due to poor impulse
control, it’s an easy thing to do: _uh, yeah, I think I saw someone around,
maybe it was Herobrine…_

Twitter has a device like this, the face-saving _unfollow bug_ – which has
been haunting Twitter as long as I remember. Me: your good friend. You:
notices that I don’t follow you. Me: _uh I’m sure I do, oh look at that, we
must have been bitten by the unfollow bug._

At which point your options are (A) to call me out on the unfollow bug excuse
being unalloyed bullshit, but also implicitly taking the punch of the
rejection; or, (B) say _sure, sure_ and accept the face-saving throw, leaving
both of us feeling better off.

We choose option (B).

Does the unfollow bug exist? If you ask around, many people will strongly
insist that it does, even giving examples, albeit examples that could also be
from fat-fingering the UI, or a real and unconscious commitment to face-saving
and avoiding the pain of rejection. I’m not convinced. Did the unfollow bug
_ever_ exist? Perhaps once. But today it’s a [consensus
ghost](/home/2020/12/08/gatwick_drone), a precipitation of the community’s
collective and deeply repressed need for harmony.
