# Horsehistory study and the automated discovery of new areas of thought

This starts speculative and ends up in an interesting place: an algorithm for
improving language. (My personal algorithm for new ideas appears to include:
think about nonsense for longer than most others are prepared to tolerate.)

These words all start with _horse-:_

Note that these are unlike: horsehair, horserider, horseshoe, etc, which are
direct attributes of a horse. That is you could equally say “horse’s hair” and
so on.

So it’s fun to invent other _horse-_ words and speculate what they might mean.
Some at random:

**For example, #1:** [Rob Miller suggested on
Twitter:](https://twitter.com/robmil/status/1404859723422306305?s=21) "Black
Beauty is my favourite horseroman."

And that’s neat, right? “Roman” as in _roman à clef,_ a novel not-so-secretly
based on real life events, and _Black Beauty_ is a novel about a horse. BUT
ALSO maybe a _horseroman_ could be like the famously equine senator appointed
by Nero in Ancient Rome.

Let’s blend those two and throw in some semantic drift, then define
_horseroman_ as one of those thought leaders who is appointed by the people in
charge, but is actually way out of their comfort zone, and answers all
questions with lengthy anecdotes about their own life. Like a bad TED talk.

**For example, #2:** [Peter Bleakley pointed out
that](https://twitter.com/petebleackley/status/1404868151305723907?s=21): "The
“horse” in “horseradish” is nothing to do with horses. It’s cognate with
“coarse” and indicates “inedible”. Same as “horse chestnut”."

So let’s take that and apply it!

Maybe _horsehistory_ could be the socially uncomfortable parts of our history
that we brush under the carpet? A useful new term!

_(Thank you Tom Carden for[continuing this conversation on
Twitter](https://twitter.com/RandomEtc/status/1404861728228323328?s=20)
yesterday.)_

This section is a tangent but I want to show you that the concept is useful.

I was never really taught about the British Empire or colonisation at school.
Sure I knew about it, but it was always in the background, taken for granted.
Sure there were some ugly aspects but aren’t there always.

Then in my 30s I visited a museum in Kolkata and unexpectedly began to learn
about the atrocities committed by my country, and the feeling of sickness and
shame that started on that day has never left me. I have continued to educate
myself. What’s worse is that I _did_ know some of the events, but I hadn’t
stopped to consider them.

Empire is not, in the UK, _ignored_ history. We all know it. But when you grow
up with something from before you can speak, and leave it unanalysed, you
accept facts that you would never accept as an adult. I imagine it’s a little
like abuse: if you grow up in an abusive household, it takes _work_ as an
adult to realise: _that wasn’t normal! That was not ok!_

Now some of this is unconscious, but some of it is very much deliberate. We
have leaders who _do_ know history, who _are_ able to talk about Empire (what
it was, what we did, what we are still doing), but keep silent and make use of
the _idea_ of Empire (“Global Britain”, now). And because there’s utility in
maintaining this myth in its unanalysed state, a kind of systemic resistance
arises: anybody who _does_ attempt to talk about Empire in an adult, clear-
eyed way is aggressively shouted down. See the current culture war about
“decolonising the curriculum” in universities which, to my mind, is simply
about saying: let’s not take this history for granted.

My pet theory:

You can’t really talk about society as an individual, but give me this rope
for a second. “British society” is aware of Empire and its atrocities, but
conscious acceptance of that knowledge is repressed – for whatever reason:
because it runs counter to our identity, because it is inconvenient, because
then we would have to do something about it, because it was awful, take your
pick.

In short, the history of the British Empire is impossible for British society
to digest.

In an individual, repressed feelings find _other_ ways to come out. So the
repressed idea of colonisation came out as Brexit, which was this almost
fanatical belief that _we_ were being colonised by a larger state, EU. Or, to
be blunt: that the pains that the British Empire had inflicted on others were
now being inflicted on us.

I read this as a way to psychologically square the circle of the repression:
to say, it’s ok to avoid looking at the history of Empire squarely in the
face, because look it’s fair now, we’ve been punished.

Anyway, that’s my amateur read.

It’s also the first application of _horsehistory:_ the study of undigestable
histories and what they do to us. Agree or disagree with my analysis in this
instance, the area opened up is interesting.

Maybe this study could also look at the ways that horsehistories become
regular histories, and how we could take British society through that journey
(several other countries with atrocities in their past have been able to look
at their history with clear eyes, act accordingly, and are healthier for it).

Or we might also examine how horsehistories ossify over time (or not), or
catalogue them globally, or re-analyse existing histories.

A new word becomes a new lens for understanding the world.

Back to the _horse-_ prefix. What does it do to words?

It’s not a straight modifier. Horseplay is not the play of a horse (not any
longer), nor horseradish a horse’s radish. It’s an unexpectedly transformative
operator, in a way that I don’t yet understand.

Maybe: it’s a matrix rotation in embedding space?

To unpack that:

An “embedding” is how machine learning encodes concepts.

A good example is _word2vec,_ an old technique (old meaning 2013) that takes
words and translates them into coordinates in a multi-dimensional space of all
possible concepts. The set of coordinates is called the embedding.

What’s neat is that the embeddings can be mathematically combined. That is to
say:

**king - man + woman = queen**

If you take the coordinates for _king,_ subtract _man_ and add _woman,_ you
get the coordinates for _queen._ Approximately…

"The resulting vector from “king-man+woman” doesn’t exactly equal “queen”, but
“queen” is the closest word to it from the 400,000 word embeddings we have in
this collection."

That example is from the EXCELLENT guide from Jay Allamar, [The Illustrated
Word2vec](https://jalammar.github.io/illustrated-word2vec/).

So thinking about the concept _horsehistory_ using this model and attempting
to decompose it, what we see is that it’s _not_ the mathematical addition of
the _horse_ embedding and the _history_ embedding. The _horse-_ prefix has
mutated the _history_ embedding somehow and turned it into something else.
That mutation is what I’m referring to as a matrix rotation.

Let me try another way:

Have you every tried [miracle
fruit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synsepalum_dulcificum)? It’s a berry with
unusual property – it doesn’t have a taste itself, but it changes _other_
tastes. In particular it rotates sour to sweet.

So I had some of these berries and was drinking beer, and the beer tasted like
Fanta. Amazing! Then some time later, suddenly as I was crossing a road, the
berries wore off and I tasted the inside of my mouth as if for the first time,
and good grief it was disgusting.

The _horse-_ prefix is the miracle berry of words.

And also:

New words are addresses to previously unused embeddings in concept space.

I think what I’m convinced by, with _horsehistory,_ is that it’s worth
developing new words.

In the sci-fi novel [Native
Tongue](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Native_Tongue_(Elgin_novel)>)
_([Bookshop.org](https://uk.bookshop.org/books/native-tongue/9781473227569))_
about aliens, linguistics, and a fierce patriarchy, Suzette Haden Elgin
supposes a new language for women. The creation of this artificial language is
an act of resistance and also way to carve out a space for unique feminist
thought and being. (It’s a stunning book.)

In _Native Tongue,_ discovering a new word in this new language is a big deal:
a new word, a new concept, a new “Encoding” as Elgin calls it, a new valid
embedding in concept phase space, we might say. Finding a new Encoding rarely
happens! Each Encoding is hard won. If somebody discovers/invents one or two,
that is huge news!

And so it is for us, I think. Discovering a new concept that isn’t simply a
metaphorical framing, today, is rare and propels thought. Back to “Brexit” for
a second: it derived from “Grexit,” itself a neologism (for Greece leaving the
EU), but _having been coined_ it was possible to poke at it the concept, to
discuss it, to ask about how it could happen and if so when and what it would
mean, and so on, and without the word I believe the process would have
unfolded in another way entirely.

Yes we can initially refer to these same concepts in other more cumbersome
ways, but as single words it is possible to combine and manipulate more ideas
that are more complex, and then they take on their own reality. Cheap
referents have value.

_(Metaphorically, I’ve long believed that this process is what the Old
Testament story of Moses receiving the Commandments is about, at least
partially. There is an arduous journey - up a mountain - at which point some
simple rules that are received, literally inscribed into rock. The rules are
straightforward and lead to a long-term healthy and stable society, at least
in this belief framework, but are hard to arrive at from first principles. The
foundational ideas are too unwieldy and require a rare perspective. Similarly,
great minds dedicate their lives to climbing their own mountains to claim
complex insights similarly inscribed in simple terms and, having received the
new concept in a graspable formulation and bringing it down the mountain for
us, our whole society benefits.)_

The question is: is it possible to move beyond _Native Tongue?_ It’s slow. Can
we automate the process of concept discovery?

Yes there are ways to invent new words with AI. Take the website
[ThisWordDoesNotExist.com](https://www.thisworddoesnotexist.com) which
generates a random word and a plausible definition (making use of GPT-2, the
ancestor of GPT-3 which, as previously discussed [is an idea
machine](/home/2020/09/04/idea_machine)). For example here’s one generated
word:

**tokou**

a black wine made from fermented soybeans cooked in molasses and yeast;
“various African wines and tokou grape”

The problem is that _tokou_ isn’t as useful as, say, _horsehistory_ (at least
on first glance). We could sit there, refreshing the website, trying out each
word to see if it’s handy, but that’s a bottleneck in the process and besides
I would lack the domain expertise in most cases. So any algorithm will have
automate that process too.

Here’s the algorithm I propose.

**1\. Invent candidate words and their definitions.**

Either invent at random, or use the method I ran by hand above: collide
multiple embeddings and jiggle the result with semantic drift. That was how
the _horseroman_ concept was generated. An AI can do this.

Now we effectively have two languages: English, which is the language we
speak, and _English-Prime,_ which is identical save for the addition of this
single new word.

**2\. Translate all of human knowledge into English-Prime.**

This isn’t as hard as is sounds.

Google Translate has used, since November 2016, a system called [Google Neural
Machine
Translation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Neural_Machine_Translation).
It’s a machine learning method of translation between language pairs.

But look closer at how it works…

“Visual interpretation of the results shows that these models learn a form of
interlingua representation for the multilingual model between all involved
language pairs,” the researchers wrote in the paper.

An interlingua is a type of artificial language, which is used to fulfil a
purpose. In this case, the interlingua was used within the AI to explain how
unseen material could be translated.

… The data within the network allowed the team to interpret that the neural
network was “encoding something” about the semantics of a sentence rather than
comparing phrase-to-phrase translations.

In short, Google Translate has an intermediary language that exists only in
the form of embeddings.

So, even without training data already written our new English-Prime, we know
how to represent it in language space: it’s identical to English but with a
single extra embedding available. And if we know that, Google Translate can
translate into it. (Exactly how is left as an exercise for the reader.)

Which means that step 2 is to automatically translate all of Wikipedia into
English-Prime.

**3\. The reward function: test whether the new word is useful**

What does useful mean? Machine learning has the idea of a “reward function”:
how do we state what good looks like? If we can do that, the process can run
automatically.

For _horsehistory_ it meant that the word acted as an [intuition
pump](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intuition_pump) (philosopher Daniel
Dennett’s term): by examining what it _could_ mean, it took me to a place
where complex ideas were reached and could then be articulated more
efficiently.

So what is our reward function? Simply:

Compare the word count of Wikipedia in English and the word count of Wikipedia
in English-Prime. If the latter is shorter, i.e. more efficient, then the
proposed new word is useful.

RINSE AND REPEAT.

Each new term is a new place to start thinking. Give each its own journal and
academic conference and see what happens.

By way of speculating about a single new field of study, _horsehistory,_ I
have proposed **a general method for the automatic generation of many new
fields of study.**

In the same way that Magnus Carlsen is a “centaur” chess player, a player of
chess greater than any other human because he has trained with a custom AI and
benefited from the wisdom of this machine which is [effectively 200 data-years
old](https://breakingsmart.substack.com/p/superhistory-not-superintelligence),
the method I propose leads to a new discipline of _centaur philosophers,_
thinkers who are able to systemically reveal new scaffoldings for thought, far
beyond what would ordinarily be reached in a single human lifetime, to more
rapidly develop and examine new ideas for the betterment of society at large.

Or the whole thing is horsefeathers. Take your pick.
