# Two product ideas for hybrid working

Hybrid working is the idea we won’t go back to working in an office after the
pandemic, not entirely, but nor we will go fully remote. Instead we’ll mix it
up.

There’s something neat about having desk neighbours – it allows for teams but
also cross-team connections. But if you’re at home 2 days/week, working out of
cafes 1 day/week, and hot-desking at the office the rest of the time, how can
that work?

Imagine your desk has a fixed position but in a _virtual_ office layout.

Now let’s imagine that on the physical office desks, and on your home office
desk, you have an array of small speakers around the perimeter of the desk.
The speakers also have microphones. This is the product.

When you sit down to work, you sign in, and you hear directionally accurate
sound from your virtual neighbours, as if you’re in adjacent cubicles –
keyboard tapping, chair scraping, coughs, and so on. Sound from your
workstation is also picked up and transmitted.

Voices would be detected by AI and automatically muffled.

Bonus points: if you’ve got [spatial
audio](https://www.tomsguide.com/uk/reference/what-is-apple-spatial-audio-how-
it-works-and-how-to-use-it)-enabled headphones, like the Apple AirPods Max,
you don’t need the special speakers. You can hear your virtual neighbours even
when you’re working remotely from, say, a plane. Assuming any of us ever fly
anywhere ever again.

This is a use-case for augmented reality smart glasses.

The idea is that you should be able to take Zoom calls when you’re out and
about because, to me, hybrid working is also about incorporating walking.

I’ve seen people I know on Instagram skiing with follow-me drones. It turns
out follow-me functionality is pretty great now: the drone maintains a
consistent angle, dodges around trees, and so on. And that’s while the target
is skiing!

So a follow-me drone made for Zoom calls should be way simpler. You would only
be going at walking pace.

You still need to see the other person while you’re on the call, and that’s
where the augmented reality smart glasses come in. They see you via a
streaming cam on the drone; you see them via a hovering virtual screen
projected in your glasses. (The glasses also have a built-in mic.)

See also [previous thoughts about new office
furniture](/home/2020/11/30/furniture), which referenced scorpion chairs and
cyberpunk aprons.
