# Post at 13.47, on Wednesday 12 Jan 2011

In the UK, a public performance of hypnotism requires a government permit, as
set out in the [Hypnotism Act 1952.](http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/Geo6and1Eliz2/15-16/46 "Lovely
interface to read legislation!") Which only makes you think: what public fear
or media frenzy occurred in 1951 that the then-government leapt in to control
mesmerism?

_Update_

[Phil](http://www.gyford.com/ "Thanks Phil!") points out the [history of
hypnotism in the '50s and '60s:](http://www.hypnosis.me.uk/arts/arty1.html "The rise of hypnotherapy as an industry.") "As far as the 1950's and 60's
went there was only one interest in hypnosis by the general public. That was
the practise of hypnosis for entertainment purposes, stage hypnotism. In 1952,
the practise of stage hypnosis came under parliamentary scrutiny, in the form
of a court case Rains-Bath v Slater. (Waxman 1989)"

"Ralph Slater was an American Hypnotist who performed in Brighton in 1948.
During this performance, a lady accused Slater of assault and professional
negligence. The case allowed for the professional negligence but did not find
that an assault occurred. (Singleton, Lord Justice 1952). This incident led to
a private member's bill to be passed in parliament. In August 1952, the
Hypnotism Act was placed on the statute book. The Act conferred power to any
local authority which granted licenses for the regulation of places used for
public entertainment, to attach conditions to that license in relation to the
demonstration or performance of hypnosis. (HMSO 1952)."

And here's a very pertinent [question to the Secretary of
State,](http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/commons/1951/dec/04/hypnotism-
public-performances#S5CV0494P0_19511204_HOC_8 "From Hansard 1951!") in
Parliament in 1951! (Thanks [Chris!](http://anti-mega.com/antimega/ "Very
quick fellas, Phil and Chris."))

It's weird to think that hypnotism was so serious and feared - a real power, a
potential terrorism - that it had to be regulated. Which (of course) reminds
me of the [UN Weather Weapon
Treaty](http://www.scribd.com/doc/3436120/UN-1976-Weather-Weapon-Treaty "The
whole treaty. Read the Articles at the beginning!") (1976) which bans military
use of "'environmental modification techniques' ... the deliberate
manipulation of natural processes--the dynamics, composition or structure of
the Earth, including its biota, lithosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere, or of
outer space" \-- ie, artificial rain, hurricanes and earthquakes. Imagine
attacking New York with an artificial earthquake. Or a hyper-thunderstorm.
_Shiiiit._

Geoengineering was quite a topic in the 1970s ([Kurt Vonnegut's brother
invented the modern process of cloud
seeding,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bernard_Vonnegut "If you don't know who
Kurt Vonnegut is, I refuse to speak to you.") dropping silver iodide into the
sky to produce rain), and there was a fear that there would be an arms-race as
there had been with atomic weapons. So: a treaty to ban military
geoengineering. And, I'm guessing, given no military investment, that's why we
didn't get the spin-off benefits in farming and domestic use. Who knows what
35 years of investment in geoengineering would have got us! Tabletop volcanos!
Genetically modified tomatoes that create their own microclimate! Super-local
sunny days to always have blue sky for picnics! Pocket clouds! And instead, we
got the internet. If I sound disappointed it's because I am.
