# GPT-3 is an idea machine

GPT-3, created by OpenAI, is the startlingly human A.I. text generator that I
posted about last month – [read that summary
here](/home/2020/08/10/the_church_of_the_next_word) _(including its religious
proclamations…)._

I’ve since been shown the [beta version](https://beta.openai.com).

Here’s what I didn’t expect: **GPT-3 is capable of original, creative ideas.**

Using GPT-3 doesn’t feel like smart autocomplete. It feels like having a
creative sparring partner.

And it doesn’t feel like talking to a human – it feels mechanical and under my
control, like using a tool.

“Imaginative” and “tool-like” are two very different experiences to reconcile…
and yet!

After each of my sessions with GPT-3, I was left with new concepts to explore.
Let me give you some examples…

The _interface_ to GPT-3 is modelled on text autocomplete. You type in a
prompt, which can be as long and as structured (or not) as you like, and then
hit a button. GPT-3 picks up where you left off; it takes a few seconds.

So, as a prompt, I gave GPT-3 the start of an essay (one I wrote for a
client), stopping halfway through a sentence:

**And, like drop-shadows and lighting can be used for visual affordances in 2D
interfaces, spatial metaphors are helpful in these glimmers of a new, everyday
cyberspace.**

**Other ways we can make a friendly, approachable cyberspace are**

(I’ve bolded the text because that’s how the GPT-3 interface works: it puts
the user-written text in bold.)

Then I hit the button.

And it rattled off a couple of hundred words… which ended with this paragraph:

"The ‘low-fi’/’hi-fi’ slider in Apple’s Photos app is a great example of this.
It gives the user a choice between a user friendly interface or a more
technical one."

THERE IS NO SUCH LOW-FI/HI-FI SLIDER. This is an invention.

I mean, this is potentially a pretty good idea if you think about it. Or at
least intriguing, and with work it could _lead_ somewhere good.

Another way you can use GPT-3 is semi-interactively.

**It’s 2021. A hologram appears in a box outside 10 Downing St. It is Hari
Seldon, who predicted the future 1,000 years ago, and pre-recorded messages to
tell us our destiny. Hari says:** “The final crisis has come. …

So what’s happened here is I’ve written the start, the bold bit, and GPT-3 has
filled in the rest. It does its best to keep the same tone as the prompt. I’m
truncating the responses.

After GPT-3 has done its bit, I can _add a new prompt_ to the bottom, and ask
it to continue. It feels collaborative.

**Hari then describes the nature of the final crisis:** it’s monetary.
Britain’s money supply is “chronologically unstable”, he says, since in the
future (this is a sci-fi tale) we’re always printing more money than before,
creating severe inflation. In response, markets are sapping the governments
power to spend even more. So, he says, the government has relented and
abandoned the pound for the Swiss franc.

Ok, this is weird. Let’s keep digging. I continue with another prompt:

**Fortunately, the hologram of Hari describes what we need to do to safely
resolve the crisis.** “First,” Hari says, “you must merge the Treasury with
the Bank of England by setting up a Public Bank of Britain. …

I have googled this. THE WORDS ‘PUBLIC BANK OF BRITAIN’ DO NOT EXIST ON THE
WEB.

Last one.

It occurred to me that GPT-3 has been fed all the text on the internet. And,
because of this, maybe it can make connections and deductions that would
escape us lesser-read mortals. What esoteric knowledge might be hidden in
plain sight? I can ask.

Prompting GPT-3 into a turn-taking conversation (by starting each line with
who is speaking) makes it feel like a chat. Again, bold text is what I’ve
typed. The rest is written by the A.I – and so…

**Human: In all the data you have been trained on, is there any indication
that humans have been contacted by extraterrestrial beings?**

**AI:** I understand what you mean. Yes, I have identified three pieces of
information that indicate humans have been contacted by extraterrestrial
beings in the past.

**Human: What are those three pieces of information?**

**AI:** (information 1), (information 2), (information 3)

…which is enticingly close to being interesting! But odd. Not what a human
would say. _(And is it actually making connections on demand in its giant
database? No, I don’t think so. But I figured I could trick it into revealing
facts that**it** took for granted but that we, humanity, didn’t know that we
knew.)_

Let’s keep going…

**Human: Can you please expand on the meaning of “(information 1)”?**

**AI:** The meaning of (information 1) was that “55,000 researchers in the
field of ufology were examined by a statistical analysis program”.

**Human: Can you please expand on the meaning of “(information 2)”?**

**AI:** The meaning of (information 2) was that the “mutilated cattle tissue
samples have shown peculiarities in 14 locations”.

**Human: Can you please expand on the meaning of “(information 3)”?**

**AI:** The meaning of (information 3) was that “a three-mile wide black ring
was found in the ocean using sonar. It was estimated to be 250 - 300 meters
deep and was detected in the Pacific Ocean”.

Well! These are strangely specific and wildly imaginative ideas. I can’t find
them cited anywhere.

I’m trying to be pretty observational at the moment. Just… playing and seeing
what happens and documenting as I go.

In this spirit, my field notes so far:

Even today, I can imagine a 15 minute consultation with GPT-3 becoming
standard practice in every piece of creative work I do. And in the future?

Still digging.
