# How would I improve RSS? Three ideas

RSS should be how we read our favourite content on the web. But it’s not.

I was trying to figure out the other day how I would describe **RSS** and its
history. Maybe something like… _(Skip this section if you already know what
RSS is.)_

Once upon a time, the ecosystem around RSS was extremely rich. Almost all
sites would provide a feed for their latest content, from the New York Times
and the BBC through to the latest news for an artist’s portfolio site. And,
because of that, there were RSS-specific search engines and even tools to
manage _“blogrolls”_ which is what we called a public list of subscriptions
that you would put in the sidebar of your personal site – a bit like your list
of follows on Twitter. Even browsers had built-in RSS readers. So much of that
has gone.

_Instead_ we have engagement algorithms in social media walled gardens,
notifications, and email newsletters.

Yet:

**My sense is that RSS is having a mini resurgence.** People are getting wary
of the social media platforms and their rapacious appetite for data. We’re
getting fatigued from notifications; our inboxes are overflowing. And people
are saying that maybe, just _maybe,_ RSS can help. So I’m seeing RSS being
discussed more in 2020 than I have done for years. There are signs of life in
the ecosystem.

My fear is that these signs of life aren’t enough for a real comeback.

My personal experience is that, after years away from it, I started getting
back into RSS.

I use the feed reader [NetNewsWire](https://ranchero.com/netnewswire/)
(iOS/Mac) which is excellent and also free. It’s fast and simple. I also use
[Feedbin](https://feedbin.com) (which is excellent and cheap) which is a cloud
service that can plug into NetNewsWire, and its sync subscriptions between my
laptop and my phone. _Additionally_ Feedbin lets me auto-forward email
newsletters from GMail so I can see them alongside the regular feeds, which is
a much saner way to read newsletters.

I love it. Looking at the stats on my phone, in terms of hours per week, my
top 5 social media apps are:

As of today I have about 160 subscriptions, and [here they are on a single
ugly page](/home/blogroll).

If you have a feed reader, you can [subscribe to Interconnected with this
feed](feed://interconnected.org/home/feed). If you don’t have one, then do
check out [NetNewsWire](https://ranchero.com/netnewswire/) (iOS/Mac) – and if
you know of equivalently awesome readers on other platforms, please drop me a
note.

My view:

**It would be a good thing if RSS were more popular.** When RSS is popular, it
shifts the balance of power away from the social media platforms, which means
that it doesn’t feed their ad targeting engines, or move people towards
extremism. Plus it’s a less hectic, more egalitarian way to read.

**BUT, the user experience around RSS has some sharp edges,** and there are
missing pieces that mean that RSS is unlikely to return to the mainstream. A
corporate-owned platform could fix these missing pieces; it’s harder for RSS
with its decentralised model.

In that spirit, **I’ve been thinking about how to improve RSS.** Three ideas!

If you don’t know what RSS is, it’s really hard to start using it. This is
because, unlike a social media platform, it doesn’t have a homepage. Nobody
owns it. It’s nobody’s job to explain it.

I’d like to see a website called something like **what is rss .com** which
explains RSS, feeds, and readers for a general audience. Then provides
download links to a couple of readers for different platforms with animations
that show how to subscribe to feeds.

The site should be designed to be linked to from a small _“what is this?”_
link next to every RSS feed on every site, maybe even customising the site for
that feed.

Perhaps I’ll built that site myself.

**Bonus points:** shift the language from “RSS” to **feed** and **subscribe**
as these are more mainstream words (though still refer to RSS to provide
continuity). And provide buttons for site publishers to use.

The “competition” for RSS is email newsletters. If RSS is going to get taken
challenge email as a channel, it could use a few extra features:

The killer app of Feedbin _(as mentioned above)_ is being able to receive
email newsletters and have them appear as RSS. Maybe this a feature that
hosted email clients like Gmail could offer – everything I tag _“newsletter”_
could show up in a private bundle of RSS feeds which I can then subscribe to?
(There’s another format called “OPML” which is how you could subscribe to a
changing bundle of RSS feeds.)

What social media does really well is help me discover new content. It does
that by

So I feel like RSS needs something similar. Rebuilding my own list of
subscriptions recently was a difficult process. I would love to see an
(optional) service that provides a whole set of discovery RSS feeds…

This would put content and feed discovery exactly where I’m ready for it:
within the reader itself. But - critically - without necessarily having to
change the reader itself.

**I wouldn’t do anything that changed the RSS protocol.** It has wide
adoption; there’s a ton of software to create and read RSS feeds. The
foundation is here to stay.

**I wouldn’t do anything that forces adoption of particular app.** Having
premium feeds (for example) only work in one reader is a bit like having a
premium email newsletter that only works if you switch email client. Ain’t
never gonna happen. Anyway, the point of this exercise is to figure out _how
to grow the absolute number of users and publishers._ That’s an ecosystem
play.

So the way to do all of this is 3rd party services and published UX patterns,
all of which are usable without changing the reader apps – but if those apps
chose to add integrations, the experience gets better.

These ideas are a roadmap for _someone._ Any benevolent publishers out there?

I have a ton of ideas of things to do in a resurgent RSS ecosystem. But those
are thoughts for another day.
