# Post at 22.24, on Saturday 9 Feb 2008

**Impro** ([Keith Johnstone](http://www.keithjohnstone.com/ "Improvisation
teacher.")) has four chapters:
[Status](http://blogs.setonhill.edu/MikeArnzen/009704.html "Once you notice
status you can't go back. It's coloured my every interaction since reading the
chapter."); Spontaneity; Narrative Skills; Masks and Trance. The following are
excerpts from the final chapter, Masks and Trance.

On what a Mask is:

"It's true that an actor can wear a Mask casually, and just pretend to be
another person, but Gaskill and myself were absolutely clear that we were
trying to induce **trance** states. The reason why one automatically talks and
writes of Masks with a capital 'M' is that one really feels that the genuine
Mask actor is inhabited by a spirit. Nonsense perhaps, but that's what the
experience is like, and has always been like."

"A Mask is a device for driving the personality out of the body and allowing
the spirit to take possession of it."

The feeling of wearing a Mask:

"Many actors report 'split' states of consciousness, or amnesias; they speak
of their body acting automatically, or as being inhabited by the character
they are playing."

"Once students begin to observe for themselves the way that Masks compel
certain sorts of behaviour, then they really begin to feel the presence of
spirits."

"At the moments when a Mask 'works' the student feels a decisionlessness, and
an inevitability. The teacher sees a sudden 'naturalness', and that the
student is no longer 'acting'. At first the Mask may flash on for just a
couple of seconds. I have to see and explain exactly when the change occurs.
The two states are actually very different, but most students are insensitive
to changes in consciousness."

On how to put on a Mask:

"Once the student has found a comfortable Mask, one that doesn't dig into his
eyes, I arrange his hair so that it covers the elastic and the top of the
forehead of the Mask. I then say: 'Relax. Don't think of anything. When I show
you the mirror, **make your mouth fit the Mask and hold it so that the mouth
and the Mask make one face.** You'll know all about the creature in the
mirror, so you don't have to think about that. Become the thing that you see,
turn away from the mirror, and go to the table. There'll be something that it
wants. Let it find it. Disobey anything I'm saying if it wants to, but if I
say "Take the Mask off", then you must take it off.'"

What a Mask can do:

"A new Mask is like a baby that knows nothing about the world. Everything
looks astounding to it, and it has little access to its wearer's skills. ...
They don't know how to take the lids off jars; they don't understand the idea
of wrapping things ... When objects fall to the floor it's as if they've
ceased to exist."

"the inability to speak is almost a sign of good Mask work. Actors are amazed
to find that it's necessary to give the Masks 'speech lessons'. ... Speech
lessons sound silly, but remember Chaplin, who never really found the right
voice for his Tramp. He made many experiments and finally made him sing in
gibberish (**Modern Times**)."

The personality of Masks:

"My suspicion is that the number of 'personality types' that emerge in Mask
work is pretty limited. ... just as myths from all over the world show similar
structures, so I believe that wherever there is a 'Pantalone-type' Mask there
will be Pantalones."

"'It's like you get the freedom to explore all the personalities that any
human being may develop into--all the shapes and feelings that could have been
Ingrid but aren't. Some Masks don't trigger any response ... maybe these are
spirits outside Ingrid's repertoire, that is any one person may have a
_limited_ number of possibilities when he develops his personality.'"

Being analytical (the Waif is a particular Mask Johnstone uses regularly,
which has its own childlike personality):

"We have instinctive responses to faces. Parental feelings seem to be
triggered by flat faces and big foreheads. We try and be rational and asset
that 'people can't help their appearance', yet we feel we know all about Snow
White and the Witch, or Laurel and Hardy, just by the look of them. The truth
is that we learn to hold characteristic expressions as a way of maintaining
our personalities, and we're far more influenced by faces than we realise. ...
Sometimes in acting class a student will break out of his habitual facial
expression and you won't know who he is until you look at his clothes."

"If we wanted to be analytical we could say that the flatness of the Mask, and
its high forehead, are likely to trigger parental feelings. The eyes are very
wide apart as if looking into the distance, and helping to give it its
wondering look. Where the bottom of the Mask covers the wearer's top lip, a
faint orange lip is painted on to the Mask. Everyone who has created a 'Waif'
character with the Mask has lined their lip up with the Mask's, and then held
it frozen. ... It was only when she froze her top lip in this way that she
suddenly found the character. The eyes of the Mask aren't level, which gives a
lopsided feeling, and is probably the cause of the characteristic twisting
movements that the Waif always has."

I've never worn a Mask, but I have held [an African tribal
mask](http://www.africancraftsmarket.com/Maasai-Mare-mask.htm "Similar to
this. Tourist tat really.") over my face and it feels like freedom.

We [use our face as storage for
emotions](http://interconnected.org/notes/2006/02/mindhacks/?p=5 "So if you
manipulate your face, your emotions change."), so why not use appearance,
poise, habitual personal space, and the expectations of others as storage for
personalities? Change any of those, and those are your personality parameters
you're playing with.

The idea there are a limited number - or at least stable set, or basic vectors

- of personalities [I find
  intriguing](http://iam.upsideclown.com/2000_07_17.shtml "And have found
intriguing for over 7 years, it seems."). It doesn't seem unlikely that there
  are certain personalities which are _with the grain_ of however the 'model of
  the other' is represented in neurons. And people will end up snapping to grid
  and _becoming_ those personalities because everyone else imposes it on them.

Trance state and spontaneity: when I write a talk, I write long hand first,
and I write as if I'm speaking. When delivering, I half read and half speak--
the words always need adjusting according to the feel of the room. But when
everything is perfect, I feel I'm aloft. I start reading from my notes, then
improvise... only to, paragraphs later, look down and found I've improvised
what I wrote before, word for word.

The experience of predestined free will is magical.
