# Instagram as an island economy

[Facebook bought Instagram for a billion
dollars.](http://newsroom.fb.com/Announcements/Facebook-to-Acquire-
Instagram-141.aspx)

If you don’t know:

_Not users but producers/consumers_

The other day I picked [some choice quotes from ‘Marx at
193’](http://interconnected.org/home/2012/04/02/marx_at_193) (an article by
John Lanchester). Here’s one: "This idea of labour being hidden in things, and
_the value of things arising from the labour congealed inside them,_ is an
unexpectedly powerful explanatory tool in the digital world."

What is the labour encoded in Instagram? It’s easy to see. Every “user” of
Instagram is a worker. There are some people who produce photos – this is
valuable, it means there is something for people to look it. There are some
people who only produce comments or “likes,” the virtual society equivalent of
apes picking lice off other apes. This is valuable, because people like
recognition and are more likely to produce photos. All workers are also
marketers – some highly effective and some not at all. And there’s a [general
intellect](http://interconnected.org/notes/2006/06/reboot8/day1.txt) which has
been developed, a kind of community expertise and teaching of this expertise
to produce photographs which are good at producing the valuable, attractive
likes and comments (i.e., photographs which are especially pretty and
provocative), and a somewhat competitive culture to become a better marketer.

There are also the workers who build the factory – the behaviour-structuring
instrument/forum which is Instagram itself, both its infrastructure and it’s
“interface:” the production lines on the factory floor, and the factory store.
However these workers are only playing a role. Really they are owners.

All of those workers (the factory workers) receive a wage. They have not
organised, so the wage is low, but it’s there. It’s invisible.

Like all good producers, the workers are also consumers. They immediately
spend their entire wage, and their wages is only good in Instagram-town. What
they buy is the likes and comments of the photos they produce (what? You think
it’s free? Of course it’s not free, it feels good so you have to pay for it.
And you did, by being a producer), and access to the public spaces of
Instagram-town to communicate with other consumers (access to these spaces is
so valuable to me that it keeps me using the iPhone, a model of smartphone
which can run Instagram, rather than Windows Phone 7 which I have used and
enjoyed, but cannot).

It’s [not the first
time](http://news.bbc.co.uk/local/birmingham/hi/people_and_places/history/newsid_8412000/8412655.stm)
that factory workers have been housed in factory homes and spent their money
in factory stores.

Implications:

I will say that it’s simple to make money out of Instagram. People are already
producing and consuming, so it’s a small step to introduce the dollar into
this.

The question is: what will the exchange rate be?

_Island economies and colonisation_

The situation of Instagram is that of an isolated island economy, separate
from the outside world, being linked to the global economy. How do we figure
out what it’s worth to the global economy? How do you value a closed system?

I can think of three examples: Japan’s period as an
[autarky](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autarky) (self-sufficient economy) in
the 1850s; China’s transition from a closed to a linked economy over the past
decade; a Pacific island such as Naura, in the [middle of
nowhere,](http://www.thisamericanlife.org/radio-archives/episode/253/the-
middle-of-nowhere) being colonised.

The third makes me think that the business of these virtual society companies
(there are lots) is to isolate some settlement on an island, allow it to
develop for a small amount of time, and then colonise it. This is the story of
empire, but it’s also the story of expansion. Think of the Wild West: first
the people, then the railways, the banks, the law, and government.

But the Wild West ended up okay, part of it we call California. Both Instagram
and Facebook are based there.

Maybe Instagram is worth a billion dollars, there’s certainly a lot of labour
encoded in the objects of its production. More valuable, I think, for Facebook
is the general intellect I have not mentioned: that developed by the factory
owners. They’re highly accomplished at paying their workers very little (i.e.,
since there is no money changing hands, we measure this by observing that the
workers are highly productive) and, out of their workers, training good
marketers. Facebook needs that in order to complete their database.

_Money; users_

More interesting to me is the question of what happens when the workers
organise, and demand a wage that is transferrable between the island economies
of the internet. I’ve absolutely no idea what that would even look like, a
transferrable store of labour but one in which the act and value of labour is
contextually variable according to its position in a social network. But I
can’t imagine money itself looked entirely obvious before it was invented
either.

The second interesting point is that the word “user,” as in a user of
Instagram or Facebook, is dangerous, because it hides all of this.
