# Instagram for webpages

Companies I would start if only I had the time, #2 in a series. ([Previously,
FuelBand for alpha
waves.](http://interconnected.org/home/2012/05/16/fuelband_for_alpha_waves))

**Instagram for webpages.**

Hear me out:

Instagram has proven there is a mass appetite for creativity and personal
expression. Look at the [popular photos on
Instagram:](http://instagram.heroku.com/) girls, pets, and sunsets; well-shot
and quirky. Facebook, by comparison, is a desert – a gridded Excel spreadsheet
of relationship changes and status updates. When at last they added the
possibility of creativity - of beauty and of ugliness - in the shape of
Facebook Timeline banners, [people leapt at
it.](http://failbook.failblog.org/tag/cover/)

(Note: [I’m obsessed with
Instagram.](http://interconnected.org/home/2012/04/11/instagram_as_an_island_economy)
I think it’s brilliant. A demonstration that people in a social group when
left together and given the right tools develop deep skills and a rich
culture.)

The mass creativity is what I really miss about MySpace. Check out [Ze Frank
talking about MySpace in
2006:](http://interconnected.org/home/2012/05/22/ze_frank_on_ugly) sure the
ugly pages were a joke, but ugliness was also a sign of a huge amount of
experimentation, of personal expression, of wit and one-upmanship, of tribes
and remixing. Culture in action!

The granddaddy of mass creative expression online was GeoCities, started in
1994 and now dead [but archived.](http://www.oocities.org/) A giant metropolis
of people speaking in HTML - the bricks and cement of the Web - learning from
one-another, improving their skills to speak better – having conversations by
creating and sharing. GeoCities is the roots of present-day [maker
culture.](http://steampunkworkshop.com/why-i-believe-maker-culture) And it was
enabled by the very thing that makers are right now injecting into the
manufacturing world with [open source hardware:](http://wiki.makerbot.com/)
_view source._ [View source!](http://www.quora.com/Web-Browsers/Who-came-up-
with-view-source-in-browsers) See how any webpage is constructed, then copy-
and-paste parts of HTML and use it yourself! What a great way to learn.

**There’s no “view source” on the iPad.**

That smells like a gap in the market.

_Productizing “view source”_

We’ll start with an Instagram clone for the iPhone and iPad. Instead of
photos, users would share webpages written in the app itself. There’s view
source, of course.

What we’ll do…

Pages would be a fixed width and height, and there would be a file-size limit.

We’ll also have a few features to invite expression:

There’s Facebook integration for sharing. The hope is that people make little
webpages with poems or aphorisms in place of writing status updates, and share
those each day instead.

While I was writing this, [Panic launched Coda 2,](http://panic.com/coda/)
their code, HTML and CSS editor. It’s remarkable for its UI – do watch the
tour, and look out for the smart styling menus: it doesn’t just help you type
the syntax to specify a colour, it presents you with a colour picker. So yeah,
we’d try and license some of the Coda technology.

_Instagram for webpages_

This is Instagram meets GeoCities meets [Diet
Coda](http://panic.com/dietcoda/) meets [Twitter
art](https://twitter.com/#!/tw1tt3rart) meets [About.me](https://about.me/)
meets Tumblr meets social scrapbooking.

We’ll know we’re doing it right when half of the pages are ugly.

Money: Initially we’ll find revenue from brands because people follow the
brands they like.

The long-term plan is that this service invents, popularises and owns a new
media type, in the same way that Twitter “owns” 140 character updates and
Instagram “owns” square photos. You end up with a generation of people highly
literate in HTML authorship and this new media type, and they associate this
literacy - this _superpower_ \- with this particular service.

A year down the road we’ll add form inputs, a super simple programming
language for back-end processing only (not mixed with the HTML), and a custom
micropayments widget. This is possible because it’s a controlled
viewing/authoring system. Bingo, we have an economy. I’m sure we can think of
something to do with that.
