# A dog that says sausages and other milestones in interspecies communication

You can tell that we’re going to end up talking with cats and dogs.

You know how there were tricorders in Star Trek and then, decades later, we
got iPhones?

If there were a scale for **Cultural readiness level** to parallel Nasa’s
[Technological readiness
level](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technology_readiness_level), where TRL 1
is "Basic principles observed" and TRL 9 is "competitive manufacturing", then
CRL 1 would be _“in fiction”_ – Star Trek basically.

And CRL 2 would be _“on TikTok”_ – making its way up the scale.

Anyway so [there’s a talking dog on
TikTok](https://www.tiktok.com/@thetalkingdogofficial).

It doesn’t really talk. It uses **“Dog Buttons”:** big plastic buttons that
your dog can push with its paws, and a voice says a word, so the dog can say
"Kenny want treat" or whatever.

This technique pioneered (I understand) by speech-language pathologist
Christine Hunger and her dog Stella. [Their
story:](https://www.hungerforwords.com)

Since dogs can understand words, could Stella use an AAC [Augmentative and
Alternative Communication] device to express herself the same way my patients
did?

_(That link has videos.)_

The dog can now express 45 words with combinations of up to 5 words. ([More
over at the Guardian
(2020).](https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2020/dec/08/teaching-dogs-
to-talk-stella-bunny))

Hunger’s site also has a shop where you can buy (a) their book, and (b) Dog
Buttons.

CRL 3 would be where the technology appears on Amazon. Here’s a [comparison
shopping guide](https://www.insider.com/guides/pets/best-dog-buttons) to the
best:

This is dumb, right? It’s just a soundboard being used so your dog can call
you from across the house? It’s no different from tricks like _roll over_ or
_shake hands?_

Well. Kinda. Maybe.

BUT: cultural readiness.

Cultural desire creates the conditions for future technology research and
development. And now we have AI… well if AIs can do protein folding then why
not barks and yelps to English?

_TANGENTIALLY:_

Ok.

Cultural readiness is one thing. Technology is another.

AND SO:

There are already organisations researching **AI to speak with whales** and
animals generally:

The _New York Times_ covers the projects of each in more detail – the goal is
ambitious:

_“Let’s try to find a Google Translate for animals,”_ said Diana Reiss, an
expert on dolphin cognition and communication at Hunter College and co-founder
of Interspecies Internet, a think tank devoted to facilitating cross-species
communication.

_([Paywall-busting link here.](https://archive.ph/hwVUe) Read the whole
thing.)_

Project CETI is planning to use a 28 underwater microphones and AV-enabled
robot fish to record whales acoustics.

“Every which way we turn there’s another question,” said David Gruber, a
marine biologist at Baruch College who leads Project CETI. “If there was a big
event that happened a week ago, how would we know that they’re still
communicating about it? Do whales do mathematics?”

And, on a species of crow which is at risk of extinction:

“They keep them in these aviaries to breed birds for future releases. But what
if these crows no longer know how to speak crow?”

So how long do we give it before this technology is a reality – 20 years? 30
years? The bottleneck does seem to be recording training data, for the moment.

**Objection #1** is that focusing on acoustics seems a bit… human-provincial
maybe? Like: dogs have great capacity to smell and to, uh, generate smell.
Won’t that be as much part of that vocabulary as anything else? Or whales:
perhaps cetaceans speak in water vortices as much as clicks and whistles.

More training data required, I suspect.

Maybe in this respect cheap, lo-fi electronic Dog Buttons are _better_ than AI
whale-song, in that they create a _new trading language_ instead of
interpreting existing sounds?

This was the goal of [CHAT by the Wild Dolphin
Project](https://www.wilddolphinproject.org/our-research/chat-research/) or
[this underwater keyboard at Epcot in
Florida](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Diver-working-with-dolphin-at-
EPCOT-Centers-underwater-keyboard-in-Orlando-Florida_fig4_319149508), also for
human-dolphin communication.

Perhaps we’ll end up having to co-create new languages.

**Objection #2** is that, well, we _already_ speak with animals, as anyone who
hangs out with animals knows.

There is very little misunderstanding when my cat speaks to me or I speak to
my cat, for example.

HOWEVER:

Some people can speak Chinese. I can’t. When Google Translate came along,
suddenly we were able to email directly with factories in Shenzhen and speak -
through copy-and-pasted green text machine translation - with reps on the
floor instead of via agents. It unlocked manufacturing for us, a small design
firm in London in the early 2010s.

So I wonder what the parallel is? Strangers!

It would be great to be able to speak with dogs, cats, and crows in their
native languages, _without_ having to co-create languages.

Sure, me and my cat live together and so we’ve figured out how to have a
conversation – she’s silent much of the time. Do cats gossip? That’s what us
humans fill the time with.

But in species with low cultural transmission, where learnt languages can’t be
passed on, native tongue translation would mean I could talk with **non-human
strangers.**

Wouldn’t it be great to say hi to a dozing dog on the street and mutually give
appreciation to the hot sun?

Or spot a crow on the wall, and ask it if it knows the way to the nearest
train station, or a coffee shop, and so on?
