# Introducing aboutfeeds.com, a Getting Started guide for web feeds and RSS

There’s a better way to read websites and it’s called **web feeds** a.k.a RSS.
But web feeds are hard to get into for new users, so I decided to do something
about it.

I posted about [suggested improvements to RSS the other
day](/home/2020/07/29/improving_rss) and top of my list was onboarding: "If
you don’t know what RSS is, it’s really hard to start using it. This is
because, unlike a social media platform, it doesn’t have a homepage. Nobody
owns it. It’s nobody’s job to explain it. I’d like to see a website … which
explains RSS, feeds, and readers for a general audience."

So because it’s no-one’s job, and in the spirit of do-ocracy:

**I built that website.**

Or to slightly abuse a phrase, _Be the change that you wish to see in the
world wide web._

[aboutfeeds.com](https://aboutfeeds.com) is a single page website, for linking
wherever you keep your web feed.

If you go to the homepage of [this very blog](/home/) you’ll see a header on
the left that says “GET LATEST POSTS”. Next to that is a link that says
“FEED.” As we all know, that link is broken unless you have a newsreader app
installed. _And so next it is a new link that says: HELP! WHAT IS A FEED?_

**About Feeds** is written for a general audience. The sections are:

I’ve adopted the word “feed” (or “web feed”) and said that “RSS” is the
technical name for it. I want to balance being informative yet approachable.

As I say on the site:

My hope is that **About Feeds** can become the default _“Help! What is this?”_
link next to every web feed icon on the web. It’s bare bones right now, and I
have a ton of ideas of how to make this site more and more useful.

If you have feedback/ideas, the [About Feeds repo on
GitHub](https://github.com/genmon/aboutfeeds) is the right place to start a
discussion. It’s a work in progress.

Please consider adding a [Help! What is this?](https://aboutfeeds.com) link
(or similar) next to your feed link or RSS icon.

**For us bloggers and site owners,** RSS is important because it’s the how we
keep the indie web work healthy. Feeds make a level playing field for brand
new blogs and the New York Times alike. It’s our direct route to readers,
without making them give up their email address or personal data. And it’s our
hedge against Facebook and the social media silos which make you pay for
access as soon as you get popular.

**For users,** RSS puts you in control. You see all the content, and if you
don’t like a feed you can unsubscribe. It doesn’t clutter up your inbox.
Opening your newsreader is 100x a better way to spend your time than
doomscrolling on Twitter. It’s a pleasant reading experience.

So I think web feeds are worth fighting for.
