# Signs of a magnetic pole flip in company ownership

What if the dominant model of company ownership inverts? What if we’re at the
end of an era of companies being owned by external stockholders, and at the
beginning of bottom-up ownership by the people who do the work – the
employees? Feels unlikely I know, HOWEVER:

**This morning’s news is that[ustwo is now employee-
owned](https://www.ustwo.com/employee-owned/).**

You’ll likely know ustwo. [Here’s their Wikipedia
page.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ustwo) They’re behind the hit puzzle game
_Monument Valley;_ long-time digital design agency (founded in London in 2004)
with a couple hundred staff; part of many joint ventures to provide
design/software/marketing/etc for startups, e.g. _DICE._ I know Mills
([@millsustwo](https://twitter.com/millsustwo)), one of the two founders, from
the general scene - huge congrats mate, brilliant move.

I have a soft spot for an _ancient_ bit of ustwo work, being home screens
designed for the _Sony Ericsson XPERIA X2_ (bloody hell that’s a mouthful)
smartphone from 2009. [Watch the Pixel City video on
Vimeo:](https://vimeo.com/7455753) "Pixel city moves through a cityscape, its
different elements linking to the functionality of your phone. Text messages
appear playfully on billboards, calendar events arrive by train, a passing
aeroplane shows your call history and much more."

ustwo have always been as inventive and pioneering with their business model
as their design work. They’ve been blogging today about going employee-owned:

It’s great that they’re sharing the nuts and bolts of how this works. It’ll
demystify the process for others who want to follow the same path.

And I’m sure there will be a bunch of future lessons in how to make this work
– like, how can there be meaningful employee involvement in how to chose work
or influence big bets or what happens when there are lean cycles in the agency
cycle? I hope ustwo’s sharing will continue.

A shout-out at this point to my friends at Clearleft! A smaller but also well-
established agency and extremely well-regarded for their design work and
community presence, the Brighton-based design studio [went employee-owned in
2020](https://clearleft.com/posts/meet-the-new-owners-of-clearleft).

Two makes a trend right?

Exciting times for design. And for the agency model, which has been in a state
of perpetual reinvention for as long as I remember.

_RELATED: There’s something fascinating in thinking about succession planning
as the founders handing control not to another individual to the machine. It
makes me think of Sikhism which, after a line of 10 gurus, handed over
leadership to an “eternal living guru,” the Sikh community itself.[As
previously discussed.](/home/2015/03/23/filtered)_

There’s always been the question about how founders exit from an agency. Two
traditional routes:

The agency world has its own nature and own norms – it’s like a more
established, parallel world to the startup ecosystem.

One feature is the presence of behemoth networks like [WPP
plc](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WPP_plc) _(that’s their Wikipedia page)._
There are a handful of agency networks around the world. WPP is UK-based and
owns a few hundred agencies, with collectively 100,000 employees and somewhere
north of 10 billion annual revenue. They coordinate, share work, get scale (a
small agency can be part of a global project), and save on back-office.

So while I _love_ that ustwo and Clearleft are figuring out the path to
employee-ownership – the eternal living guru of the organisation…

…thinking about the larger scale makes me ASK:

**What is the equivalent of the agency network for employee-owned orgs?**

Can we imagine some kind of multinational network organisation that
coordinates, shares work, achieves scale, etc, _without_ taking full control
of the member agencies?

Going further:

The agency world has a fractal structure. Agencies are often 50% freelancers
and they subcontract like crazy. Then they roll up into bigger firms – the
[Coasean](/home/2014/12/23/corporations) logic of travel towards lower
internal transaction costs means agencies combine and combine again until you
get the network giants.

(The startup world parallel is the data-driven gravitational force which
results in Big Tech, a.k.a. Srnicek’s platform capitalism.)

Can employee-ownership exist at all scales?

Hey and here’s an example in the UK! [CoTech](https://www.coops.tech) is a
network of 45 creative technology companies, all individually organised as co-
ops, providing digital services _together._ More like that pls.

_(Thank you to the folks at the co-op[Common
Knowledge](https://commonknowledge.coop) for letting me know about this.
Common Knowledge itself creates digital tools to force-multiply social
movements.)_

_Perhaps_ we’re at the beginning of an ownership inversion where organisations
from big to small will follow the principle of bottom-up agency.

Dominant models change every so often! I remember reading that the dominant
model in the US relatively recently (1900s?) was family-owned businesses. I’ll
have to hunt down that reference.

The analogy here is to [geomagnetic
reversal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geomagnetic_reversal), the process by
which the Earth’s magnetic poles flip – the North Pole becomes the South Pole;
the south becomes the north. It happens periodically: "There have been 183
reversals over the last 83 million years (on average once every ~450,000
years). The latest, the Brunhes-Matuyama reversal, occurred 780,000 years
ago."

_(i.e. we’re overdue, just in case you were wondering what else the 2020s may
deliver.)_

So I guess something happens such that the pole-flip kicks off, and sheer
magnetism drags everything else with it to complete the process? There is no
halfway house.

Once I started looking for signs of an ownership inversion, labour becomes
capital and capital becomes labour, then I started seeing it everywhere:

THE COMMON THREAD:

How an organisation’s self-determination, ownership, and value-creating _work_
become indivisible, held by the same people: the employees?

It turns out this same question is being asked at all scales.

So let’s assume the magnetic pole flip is in progress!

Or at least, let’s assume this: there is tectonic tension _towards_ this
corporate ownership inversion, even if as yet unrealised. So enabling tools
will quickly find traction and unlock behaviour.

Answering questions like…

And so on.

If you were a VC you might invest in this, as a long term bet.
