# Post at 19.06, on Sunday 1 Jan 2012

There's a nice turn of phrase in Borges' short story [Tl√∂n, Uqbar, Orbis
Tertius:](http://www.coldbacon.com/writing/borges-tlon.html)

"He and my father had entered into one of those close (the adjective is
excessive) English friendships that begin by excluding confidences and very
soon dispense with dialog. They used to carry out an exchange of books and
newspapers and engage in taciturn chess games... I remember him in the hotel
corridor, with a mathematics book in his hand, _sometimes looking at the
irrecoverable colors of the sky._"

In the Mars trilogy, Kim Stanley Robinson has his characters also watch the
colours of the sky. In one of his fictions (it might be the Mars trilogy, it
might be a short story, it could be both), Robinson has theatre become a
resurgent art form: irrecoverable experiences in an age of on-demand media. I
can see that.

Borges approaches the uniqueness of experience from another angle in this
footnote of the same story:

"All men, in the vertiginous moment of coitus, are the same man. All men who
repeat a line of Shakespeare _are_ William Shakespeare."

There's something appealing about this. At birth, as tabula rasa, we are as
one. A single entity, instantiated in billions of brains across time and
space. And symmetry breaks and breaks again, and we become our separate
selves. But this loneliness can be reversed: at certain singular moments, we
exist in transcendent communion with other individuals who have taken the same
journey as ourselves, and for an instant we are identical, one, the same
thoughts and the same concerns, before time drags us on and we become
individual once again.

But you know, exiting that moment of communion, you could have taken a
different turn. You know, and that's comforting.
