# Post at 13.30, on Saturday 24 Feb 2007

I've been travelling a bunch recently. Jet lag is a funny beast. I used to let
myself adjust slowly, returning east, but now I go cold turkey: Up at 7am
every day, from the first day I get back. It makes sure I sleep through the
night. Not making concessions to my body throws into relief what my body
really wants to do.

For instance:

When my body wants to go to sleep, the taste of sleep comes on. I get heavy
and my head lolls.

During the period I would usually be fast asleep, I'm kinda okay, but it's
like walking through treacle. I'm also cold.

Just before my body expects to be waking up - what is, local time, early
afternoon - I get that taste in my mouth again, I feel super tired, and my
bladder fills up. Give it another hour or so, as I come out of the slump, and
my feet get really hot.

What's going on here? I've no idea. But I can guess.

First, my body helps me go to sleep. Even when I'm tired, I'm not necessarily
sleepy (I hope you see the distinction). My body must be releasing something
to make me sleepy. That lasts an hour or so, enough to knock me out.

That taste in my mouth? While I'm asleep, my body is doing its maintenance
tasks. It's dumping out the nasty chemicals, metabolising stuff which it
didn't during the day, taking the opportunity to check all my cells and digest
the old ones, and whatever. The taste of sleep and crusty eyes, that's my body
excreting through my face.

Second, when I'm waking up, that's my body doing its clean-up tasks from the
overnight work. There's stuff it kept back because it couldn't excrete them
earlier, so when it knows I'll be up and about soon, it flushes liquids to my
bladder and the last batch of stuff to my mouth.

My temperature regulation goes to daytime mode last, usually just after I've
woken up. My body heats up, and this is felt most in my feet which go cold/hot
and clammy (I think this is because my body makes assumptions about whether
I'm standing or lying down). I get this same thing if I stay in bed too long
on weekends.

What this all _feels_ like gives me a new theory.

I feel like I'm operating my body with levers and buttons, when I get up, I'm
jet-lagged, and my body expects to be in deep sleep. I have to operate my legs
with levers, and remember to reel my shoulders in, out of the way of door
frames. Making breakfast isn't automatic, it's a sequence I have to assemble
then follow: Get cereal, get bowl, open cereal, pour cereal into bowl, put
down box...

This subjective sensation does not - does not _one little bit_ \- correspond
with the idea that my body is _resting._

What it corresponds with is lag. If I operate my body when it wants to be
asleep, my body is thrashing to keep up. I'm overloading it. When I'm asleep,
it's because my body is simply too loaded to sustain consciousness.

Those overnight maintenance tasks must be a dog to run. Saving my memory out
to long-term storage, running over recent experiences to figure out what to
pre-emptively put in the cache, monitoring cell division, allocating
resources, doing integrity checks, figuring out how to digest the worst bits
of that agro-industry food, shuttling chemicals round my body. That takes
work! My body is a busy bee!

Consciousness - being awake - is what my body throws me as a sop when it
doesn't need the resources for anything else.

(Apologies for the ugly mind/body division I've been making here. For mind,
read 'the self-aware bit of the mind+body me' and for body read 'me.')
