# Three fantasy policies around jobs

If I were leader of a political party, there are a few things I would do
specifically around jobs. This is not an exhaustive list. These are three off
the top of my head.

Btw I would talk about the **climate crisis** the whole time, and use that to
shape policy. It’s the big existential thing for the next decade (and more) so
everything has to be seen in light of that.

A big question is: **what is the dividend of technology?** Like, the internet
is this crazy powerful means of coordination, and that’s new in the last 50
years, so what is it for? The point of progress is to improve human lives. But
that doesn’t happen automatically.

So pick something basic: let’s set an ambition that everyone gets to work a 4
day week. The dividend of technology should be to raise wages (i.e.
productivity but where the surplus doesn’t go entirely to shareholders) and
create a welfare safety net such that we all have more leisure time.

_(Note that I am not a believer in Universal Basic Income. I believe that the
right to contribute to the world we share - via “work,” which is the name we
give to useful activity - is every bit as important as the right to share in
the wealth produced. At best the focus on UBI obscures the right to meaningful
contribution; at worst it exists as a pay-off from inhuman corporations to
turn us into disempowered, non-contributing consumer drones.)_

My party would say that we won’t get to the 4 day week in 5 years or even 10,
but it will be measured and reported and used as a North Star.

I would lean into the changing nature of work: primarily the gig economy.

On the gig economy, yes gig couriers and gig food delivery drivers and so on
are taken advantage of. But I don’t put that down to the gig economy
specifically: that’s just how companies are, and the mechanism of employment
dodges the standard protections.

But talk to some of the workers, and they enjoy the flexibility, freedom, and
the direct gearing between effort and income.

Embrace change. And make sure it matches our values.

So I don’t think gig economy workers should be merged into the regular
employee workforce. Create **a new category of worker** who is not actually
inside the company, has limited employee benefits, and enjoys a certain amount
of freedom – but their destiny is somehow bound up with the companies they
rely on for gig. _([As previously discussed](/home/2014/12/30/city_link) in,
oh my gosh, 2014.)_

What to do with this new category? Focus on mutualism.

Mutualism. Neither party (worker nor firm) should be net-net taking advantage
of the other, in order to allow full reign to choice. Of course our goal is to
find win-wins – and each benefits from the other’s success.

Then, **a distributed university for the 2nd career.**

People now change jobs - often radically - multiple times over the course of
their career. Sometimes by choice. Sometimes because the type of thing they do
is no longer relevant (LIKE: manufacturing in the UK in the past; call centre
workers in the future, as voice interfaces and expert systems really come in).

Education and training no longer comes solely in the first couple of decades
of life.

So I would create a new university _(academic and vocational)_ for people in
their 40s. Everyone would get a go: there would be loans/subsidies for it.

The goal would be to open up retraining to totally different, modern careers,
for everyone.

Learning from the pandemic, hybrid education is potentially something very
effective. A lot of education can be delivered virtually, but there is still a
benefit to having a cohort and building a network. Perhaps the way this could
be delivered is via colleges in every town that function like a cross between
co-working spaces, libraries, and canteens, but with really great internet
connections and support staff. You would show up, be timetabled, and get
guidance, but all the courses would be over video.

All of these policies cascade down to other interventions.

For example, to implement the delivery of education online, to everyone, you
want to reduce friction in getting on the internet.

Which means you probably want to nationalise broadband and create a universal
minimum service guarantee. This is good for the education policy but also it
should be loved by businesses. Just as Amazon wouldn’t be able to run their
e-commerce without roads (so that warehouse workers can get to work, and
orders can be delivered) and therefore it makes sense that roads are paid from
taxes, Amazon - and others - need the internet for consumers and for an
educated workforce. Cascading the policy down, internet access gets thought of
as national infrastructure. (A good economist should be able to show this with
numbers, I’m sure.)

I’m sure there are other cascading policies, thinking about all of the above.

Nobody’s going to make me king but I would like to see some more ambition from
politicians to argue for the value of the state, and what it’s good for, and
to find ways to build an actually progressive society for the 2020s (instead
of trying to regulate what we have now, which seems like it will waste
energy). See these suggestions in that spirit.

Yeah, so.
