# Karma as ancient progress studies

It’s interesting to look at karma with this lens: an explanatory framework for
_progress._

I was listening to this recent _In Our Time_ episode about…

the doctrine of Karma as developed initially among Hindus, Jains and Buddhists
in India from the first millennium BCE. Common to each is an idea, broadly,
that you reap what you sow: _how you act in this world has consequences either
for your later life or your future lives_ , depending on your view of rebirth
and transmigration.

So the idea of reincarnation is widespread - “karma” is first mentioned in
1500 BCE, the Ancient Greeks have “metempsychosis” - but around 800 BCE the
idea of karma develops in India in this direction:

the specifics of this moral mechanism

You can be re-born as a plant, animal, human (in one joke “even as a cooking
pot”) – depending on how you behave.

It’s to do with your _actions._ It’s a physics of ethics.

In India it’s more systematic. It’s seen as an automatic mechanism, almost
like a science, a physics of reality, and it has this moral characteristic.

But I hadn’t really thought about what re-birth _means._ This transmigration.

Like, is there a continuation of identity? Nooooo… it’s fuzzier than that.
There are metaphors…

the self is like a caterpillar that crawls up a blade of grass and reaches
over to another blade, and crawls down it to the ground again. The soul is a
creature that can travel through this life, reach to another life, and come
back to a new life again.

Which gives me a glimpse.

Though what is the exact nature of this? It’s hugely debated…

(It feels like the opposite of the _Star Trek_ transporter: in the transporter
you are broken into data about atoms, faxed down to the planet’s surface, and
reconstructed – and let’s be clear here, it’s not you, right? You’re dead,
it’s someone who looks like you, with your memories, and they believe they’re
you, but it’s not you, _Star Trek_ proposes a material universe with the
transporter but then logically is full of dead people who die over and over
again, and deny it. Contrariwise karma says that you die but something
_persists.)_

Whichever it is, karma includes this longitudinal focus on _life after life_
which I will say as a claim is weaker than immortality, and stronger than
ancestors/descendants.

Ultimately, I was utterly taken with this statement from the episode:

the morality of this means that _we have the possibility of progress_. It’s
not one life and you’re done, it’s like being a goldsmith. As a goldsmith
crafts a beautiful statue, and if he doesn’t like it, can melt it back down
again, and try to make something more perfect, so that’s what our lives are.
They’re attempts, and they can get better.

The possibility of progress!

Ah-ha!

I know this quote is about individual progress, let’s call it progress-1. But
some branches of karma get into cohort transmigration, and that takes us
closer to the sense in which I’m taking it, progress-2, today’s conception of
progress: something singular that pervades all, a new nature, borderline Whig
history or manifest destiny in a way, that we all contribute to but has its
own identity and history and direction. The two senses overlap in some
mysterious fashion.

Now this is where that thought took me, the idea that karma allows for the
possibility of progress, ambiguously progress-1 and progress-2:

I always wonder about the function of systems.

Well not _the_ function, systems are multivariate, but _a_ function certainly.

Then I think about systems and frameworks we have today with overlapping
roles. That helps me see the ancient way, not monumentalising it, and that
gives me new perspectives on today. Look, it’s a method.

And karma, yes it’s a moral framework _now,_ but what’s the mega trend of 1500
BCE, what created the conditions such that it emerged in the first place, what
was it there to _do?_

_Was that when progress first became noticeable?_

This is where my imagination takes me, let’s be clear, I’m speculating.

But listen… there’s always been the idea of change, right, and even history
(which, in the west, only emerged as a concept a little later, in Classical
Greece) is just one thing after another.

I mean there _was_ progress - stone to bronze to iron - but I get the
impression that it wasn’t obvious.

Now suddenly you have kingdoms and cities, I mean Ur was 3800 BCE, but you
have a flourishing in India in this period, so there’s a density of
population, an urban way of life, and clearly this is part of the exponential
acceleration of human civilisation and technology that we are still part of,
and:

Maybe this is when the progress exponential became rapid enough, became
noticeable for the first time? Maybe that’s the context we’re talking about.

Like: _how do you explain progress?_

That’s what you’d be asking, when progress itself was new.

(Meanwhile the Mycenaean Greeks in the ancient world were developing a
cosmology of descent, from the gods, to the age of heroes, to today (and
tomorrow, which will be worse). Still we see the arrow of time.)

I’ll come back to karma in a sec.

_Progress Studies_ was invented as a discipline in 2019:

Progress itself is understudied. By “progress,” we mean the combination of
economic, technological, scientific, cultural, and organizational advancement
that has transformed our lives and raised standards of living over the past
couple of centuries. For a number of reasons, there is no broad-based
intellectual movement focused on understanding the dynamics of progress, or
targeting the deeper goal of speeding it up. We believe that it deserves a
dedicated field of study. We suggest inaugurating the discipline of “Progress
Studies.”

The authors agree that “progress” is a loaded term: "We know that, to some
readers, the word progress may sound too normative."

_(Normative in its “what ought to be” sense, i.e. perhaps fairness, as in
normative economics, not in its sense meaning “standard”.)_

And to me, that overloading of “progress” is really the point: this is not
just a study of how and why change happens, but also why it tends in a
particular direction (“progress”), and _also_ the new discipline includes this
huge moral SHOULD - that is, "normative" \- because it’s not just a study of
“history seems to have directionality and it can go slower or faster” but it
is called PROGRESS.

So it’s an opinionated discipline, and they make that axiomatic: "we must
affirmatively make the case for the study of how to improve human well-being."

And I see _progress studies_ as a positive activity: let’s not just work on
being better, but work on being better at being better.

Well, but how?

So progress studies rhymes with karma, for me.

Both are concerned in explaining why the world improves.

(Again, I am not speaking about karma itself here, but the associations it
sets up in my head.)

Imagine spotting progress for the very first time! So karma, to me, also
brings in the mechanism:

if you look at nature, even though you can’t see the seed below the ground, it
gives rise to plants again and again, and that gives us a clue as to how
humans work.

(Quote from the _In Our Time_ episode.)

_Some new entity_ is being proposed, something that we can neither see nor
touch but has a reality that strongly affects our own. Like gravity, as an
analogy, but not just a force, which is a symptom, the Higgs field itself
maybe.

What is it?

What is this fabric of souls, how do we think of it?

I see it as something between “culture,” which is the sum of our values and
norms and material artefacts, and Kevin Kelly’s concept of the
[technium](https://commonreader.wustl.edu/the-technium-and-how-kevin-kelly-
changed-his-mind/) – "our system of tools and machines" that has "biases and
tendencies … agency".

I think of that idea (that karmically haha comes round and comes round again):
[We shape our tools and thereafter our tools shape
us.](https://quoteinvestigator.com/2016/06/26/shape/)

Society is not something that we’re in, it’s something that we do. [As I said
million years ago](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P0YdK_Tds4Y) _(100 Hours,
TedXAthens, YouTube)._

The picture for me is this:

Re-birth in karma is the interplay between the individual and the abstracted
culture (of ideas, tools, etc) that we create which has - it turns out, this
is the best way to conceive of it - its own existence, and looking at it in
this way, we create culture, and also we precipitate out of culture.

Culture or whatever, really. The land at the top of the blades of grass.

We live on through our acts!

So it helps make sense of all of that.

Then karma differs from progress studies, aside from scale of course, in these
two ways:

Now suddenly we have this rich terrain of moral argument and learning.

For me, this is now where I want to pay closer attention, to take lessons from
karma - a vast and ancient and filigreed tradition - its morality in
particular, the debates on intention and trade-offs, in order to think about
the politics of progress.

FOOTNOTE.

From the tech startup world, here is an example of karma and re-birth in
microcosm, well _nanocosm:_

The biggest thing for me is that I never want to have to solve the same
problem twice, ever.

… Defaulting to putting them in public, partly it’s sort of an insurance
scheme.

I’ve worked for companies where I did everything in private. And then I left
those companies and I’ve lost all of that work!

Everything that I do in public that has an open source license attached to it
is just out there … That’s a problem that I’ve solved once and will never have
to go back and revisit.

I love Willison’s framing right there – as he’s re-born company through
company, there is some essence that continues, and by his acts he wants that
new instantiation of self to start from a better place.

He doesn’t know who he’ll be next, so he benefits everyone. Open source. The
concept of progress!

He calls it “selfish,” Larry Wall would call it
[laziness](http://wiki.c2.com/?LazinessImpatienceHubris) – as a virtue!

And I can’t helping thinking we can simply call it good karma.
