# Apple is mainstreaming the inventions of Alan Kay. Maybe the metaverse is next

I have this semi-stupid semi-serious theory about Apple which is that they
are, one by one, mainstreaming the inventions of computer scientist Alan Kay,
and that is their raison d’etre. It’s a theory with predictive power because
you can speculate where they’re going next.

Dr Alan Kay: a pioneering computer scientist. [Here’s a bio and list of
inventions](https://computerhistory.org/profile/alan-kay/) (though I’ll get to
those). He started at the University of Utah with ARPA funding in the 1960s,
then went to Xerox PARC.

Apple:

Ok so first there was the Macintosh which was the first mainstream personal
computer, and as we know it was inspired by two tours Steve Jobs and Apple
employees took round Xerox PARC in 1979.

They saw the Xerox Alto which had been developed in 1972, the first attempt at
the bringing to market the PC as invented by Doug Engelbart and team in 1968
([as previously discussed](/home/2021/05/05/strange_loop)).

The story of that visit:

That day Jobs and his engineers sat in awe as Goldberg and the Alto team
demoed the intricacies of the mouse-driven GUI, Smalltalk, as well as the
Ethernet technology they had developed to network their Altos together. Jobs
was so blown away by the details of the GUI, the rest passed over him like a
fog. “It was one of those apocalyptic moments,” Jobs said. “I remember within
ten minutes of seeing the graphical user interface stuff, just knowing that
every computer would work this way someday. It was obvious.”

_(GUI = graphical user interface.)_

BUT

Three years ago, in an answer on _Quora,_ Alan Kay himself reflects on what it
was like at Xerox PARC during the Jobs visit: "it was the work of my group and
myself that Steve saw, yet the Quora question is the first time that anyone
has asked me what happened."

A second important fact about the 1979 demo to Steve, was that he missed most
of what we showed him. More than 15 years later he admits this in this
interview: [How Steve Jobs got the ideas of GUI from
XEROX](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J33pVRdxWbw&t=396s) _[YouTube]_ where
he says that we showed him three things but he was so blinded by the first one
(the GUI) that _he missed both networking and real object-oriented systems
programming._

Kay didn’t invent the personal computer, Apple’s first breakthrough mainstream
product. That pre-existed his involvement.

But Kay _was_ involved in the Xerox Alto as a _networked workstation_ (that’s
what it’s called on his Wikipedia page). Un-networked computers and networked
computers take you to completely different ways of working.

Jobs made good on the first miss, networking, with the iMac – the beginning of
Apple’s rebirth under Jobs: "The ‘i’ stands for ‘Internet,’" he said.

Jobs made good on the second miss, object-oriented systems programming with
his second computer company, [NeXT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NeXT).

The NeXT operating system was famously, heavily object-oriented – which made
it insanely easy to develop for. (Using a NeXTstation was what got me into
coding.) NeXT was acquired by Apple, Jobs returned (and launched the iMac),
and the OS became the underpinnings of first Mac OS and then iOS. The reason
iPhones ignited such an incredible app ecosystem is down the NeXT-derived
operating system.

_(If you don’t believe me, then you never tried to develop for Symbian, the
operating system for the Nokia Series 60 line, far and away the most popular
smartphone line when iPhone came out. Symbian was so incredibly difficult to
develop for that I remember seeing a flashlight app on Nokia’s app store
selling for like $20. The flashlight was literally the tutorial app you would
build when you set up the developer environment. Developer friction was that
high.)_

Anyway: Alan Kay invented object-oriented programming. That was his thing.

Alan Kay also invented the _Dynabook._

The KiddiComp concept, envisioned by Alan Kay in 1968 while a PhD candidate,
and later developed and described as the Dynabook in his 1972 proposal “A
personal computer for children of all ages”, outlines the requirements for a
conceptual portable educational device that would offer similar functionality
to that now supplied via _a laptop computer or (in some of its other
incarnations) a tablet or slate computer_ with the exception of the
requirement for any Dynabook device offering near eternal battery life. Adults
could also use a Dynabook, but the target audience was children.

The illustration of the Dynabook concept (which is on that Wikipedia page) is
basically an iPad with a keyboard. Kay didn’t originate that form, but he made
it believable.

For Steve Jobs, the lineage was clear. He invited Kay to the bombshell launch
of the iPhone.

I think he invited me to the 2007 iPhone unveiling partly because it was kind
of a tiny “Dynabook” – and he had always wanted to do one – and partly because
he was going to use a quote of mine that he had always taken to heart “People
who are really serious about software should make their own hardware”.

The photo of us chatting was taken right after the event. He brought the
iPhone to me, put it in my hands, and asked: “Alan, is this good enough to be
criticized?”. My reply was to make a shape with my hands the size of an iPad:
“Steve, make it this size and you’ll rule the world”.

When the iPhone had been revealed a few minutes earlier I realized that they
must already have done an iPad/Dynabook-like machine (easier) and that the
“iPhone first” must have been a marketing/timing decision.

(From an article which excerpts another of Kay’s _Quora_ answers: [Alan Kay
Talks What he and Steve Jobs Talked About at the Original iPhone Keynote in
2007](https://www.iphonehacks.com/2018/04/alan-kay-talks-what-he-steve-jobs-
talked-about-at-the-original-iphone-keynote-in-2007.html).)

Although Jobs saw the “slate” form factor as key to the Dynabook, Alan Kay
believes that Apple has missed the point: in another _Quora_ answer, [Kay goes
into the goals of the Dynabook concept](https://www.quora.com/American-
computer-pioneer-Alan-Kay-s-concept-the-Dynabook-was-published-in-1972-How-
come-Steve-Jobs-and-Apple-iPad-get-the-credit-for-tablet-invention) and points
out that it’s for children and it’s programmable. But Apple didn’t allow this:
"users (even children) were forbidden to make actively programmable things on
the iPad and share them on the Internet."

Hey but… [Swift Playgrounds](https://www.apple.com/swift/playgrounds/),
Apple’s game-like environment for learning programming and creating apps on
iPad, which is mysteriously getting more and more powerful each year? I always
wonder why so much effort goes into it. Something going on there.

So, beyond personal computers and the Macintosh, we’ve got…

What’s next?

WELL.

I’m not saying that pursuing Alan Kay’s inventions is _exclusively_ what Apple
does. In bringing something to market, it never looks exactly like the
original vision. It’s slower maybe, or the step-by-step strategy reveals
something else along the way that becomes a preoccupation for a decade. But
Apple trends back towards the North Star, which is Alan Kay.

And am I genuinely saying that this is what Apple consciously does? That there
is someone in corp strat combing over Kay’s work and figuring out what to
mine? Probably not. Not really.

(Maybe Steve Jobs wrote it into a giant Seldon’s Plan for the future of the
fruit company, maintained and monitored to this day in an inner sanctum by a
secret cadre of mini Tim Cooks.)

“Apple is channelling Alan Kay” is not really a theory, strictly. It’s a
heuristic metaphor, imaginative scaffolding. I carry around a whole bundle of
these in my head, as do we all I suppose. I’m not bothered about the truth
value of a heuristic metaphor, mainly that it’s crudely on the money enough
such that I can (a) reason more rapidly and also (b) stretch it to arrive at
new possibilities.

So what happens if we stretch this one?

Reading [Alan Kay’s Wikipedia bio](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Kay),
after forays into Atari, Apple itself, and the _One Laptop Per Child_ project,
the great as-yet-not-mainstreamed invention that really stands out to me is
**Croquet.**

Croquet is "Croquet is a software development kit (SDK) for use in developing
collaborative virtual world applications."

It’s a programming environment to create multiplayer 3D worlds… which are
themselves programmable.

Look: it’s a 3D persistent world that multiple people can be in at the same
time.

Sounds… [metaverse](/home/2021/12/02/metaverse)-y?

Like, _the whole emerging strategy for the 2020s of Facebook (now Meta) and
the tech startup ecosystem?_

Only Croquet is way more than that.

Croquet allows users to edit the source code of the 3D world from within the
world, and immediately see the result, while the world is still running. The
running program does not need to be ended, and there is no compile-link-run-
debug development loop. Any part of the program may be edited, down to the VM
and OpenGL calls.

I have seen Kay present Croquet on stage and it is WILD. Almost two decades
ago.

_Back in 2003:_

Alan Kay was giving a talk about old ideas from the history of computing. Two
big projector screens, one at each end of the stage.

It starts as a slideshow.

Then turns into interactive, object-oriented programming. Kay right clicks on
an object in the deck and rewrites the code: the slide becomes a dynamic
simulation of a car driving down a road. We thought it was a slide but
actually it’s live code.

AND THEN: the screens show different views. The screen on the right pulls
back, and it turns out we weren’t looking at a slide, or even a screen-based
coding environment. We were duped. We were zoomed in on a flat television in a
fully realised 3D virtual world.

The screen on the left pulls back too, then travels through a portal, looks to
the side, and sees the avatar that represents the screen on the right.

It was mind blowing.

I still have my notes…

3d environment on the left, then the 2d screen on the right zooms out and
suddenly we’re in a 3d environment with panels all over it. all 3d OO, an
avatar. each panel is a portal. the left is doing things from a first person
POV, replication architecture doing realtime transactions over the internet.
late binding protocol – message based system. all objects have their own
objects.

every object is different, and can communicate with its peers. so you pull
down the objects to fill in the environments, massively parallel realtime
transaction stuff. then messages are synced up.

left screen manipulated a portal into another space. he enters it, and he’s in
a new 3d space. left turns round, and sees alan on right screen enter the
portal into the 3d view of the surface of mars.

(This is from back when conference talks were given sufficient time and were
super dense.)

I sound pretty hilariously amazed, breathless even in plain text. I still am
tbh.

What Kay really cracked, with Croquet, is more general than in-world
programming. It’s the overall user experience paradigm to interact with
objects in 3D space in a way that makes intuitive sense, without dropping out
to a separate console.

_**Update 26 Apr:** It turns out that the whole keynote is on YouTube. It
looks pretty old school now, but you can see past that – it’s remarkable. And
you just ask… what if we’d spent the last 20 years iterating on this vision?
The path not taken. But it’s still possible to pick up the ideas. Watch it
here: [Alan Kay: Croquet Demo
(2003)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uQTeWJNkylI) (58 mins)._

Multiplayer, persistent virtual reality worlds, programmable from the inside –
that’s the Alan Kay invention that Apple hasn’t mainstreamed yet.

Then there are all those rumours about Apple and virtual reality smart
glasses… all the jigsaw pieces that Apple has dropped like spatial audio, and
augmented reality toolkits, and ultra-wideband low latency high precision
positioning chips, and insanely high-powered low-energy silicon, which isn’t
really being used anywhere… and all the work they’ve done around iCloud, and
identity, and in-app app development…

And I was thinking about VR headsets the other day, [noticing that the missing
piece is the operating system](/home/2022/04/20/vr)… For all of Apple’s work
towards the technology of smart glasses, we don’t know what _“reality OS”_ is
going to be like to use. Is it going to be immersive and 3D? Is it going to be
a shared social space? Will the user experience build on the lessons of
“object oriented” direct manipulation, like the original desktop metaphor but
updated for virtual environments?

I can’t help but wish that what Apple is working their way towards, slowly,
over many years, is Alan Kay’s vision of the metaverse.
