# Idle thoughts about how we replace keyboards

Smartphone typing continues to be terrible. Maybe we look at possible futures
to give us a way out?

Look, I’m terrible at boundaries and time-management with both a toddler and
too much work is _hard._ So I’m spending a bunch of time typing with my
thumbs, and reminded once again that it is sloooow. Keyboards are good because
your fingers can prepare to hit the next key way faster than individual thumbs
can move.

Alternatives to thumb-typing are: **swiping keyboards** and **voice.** Both
suffer from the repair problem, which in a nutshell is: if you go wrong, how
do you fix it? With swipe, you go word by word, and when you notice a problem
you have to delete a _whole word_ and just try again. You can’t “edit” without
switching mode to typing. With voice, you go sentence by sentence, and
repairing is even more of a context switch.

No, we need something better for smartphone typing.

So… we could ditch QWERTY?

The ideal smartphone keyboard would allow for the normal grip position with
either one or two hands – and maximum efficiency of the available fingers, not
just thumbs. Some avenues…

How about a chording keyboard, where you press a combination of keys? Last
time I rambled about keyboards on Twitter, [Tom
Whitwell](https://twitter.com/TomWhitwell) pointed me at the [Microwriter
keyboard](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microwriter) invented in 1978 which is
held in the hand and apparently faster than regular typing. With training.

[Here’s a chorded keyboard for a smartphone](http://www.srimech.com/chorded-
keyboard-for-mobile-phones.html) as a hacker project (thanks [Hans
Gertwitz](https://twitter.com/gerwitz)).

Way back in 2017, Ben Firshman [said in this
tweet](https://twitter.com/bfirsh/status/831800755061395456) "what if typing
was a conversation instead of a one-way thing? It could guide you towards your
intent somehow" – which I am super into.

What if you tapped a key, and around that key appeared the words that were
most likely to be used next, and then based your movement towards those words,
you saw the words that you might use _next,_ maybe even appearing two or three
words in advance, like gliding through super-intelligent autocomplete?

I remember there was work way back in 2010 about using vibration and
electrostatic to create **artificial textures** on touchscreens. [Here’s an
open access paper from 2019](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3340961) reviewing
different methods. As you glide your finger, could the probability or
otherwise of the following word be communicated as the resistance given to
your finger?

The thing is, shifting from QWERTY to something different feels unlikely right
now. We’re at the wrong end of the S-curve for paradigm shifts.

BUT,

Instead of smartphones, we can imagine what comes _after_ smartphones, and
what the keyboard interface might be for _that._ And then evolve the
smartphone keyboard to be training wheels for that future.

What I mean is: imagine Apple wants to get us all into augmented reality.
That’s a huge shift. They might conceptually invent an input mode for that,
then port components of it into the “today” to train us into using it (and to
learn themselves, of course). So we get trained to use voice input to ear buds
and swiping letters on smart watches – and the offer of augmented reality
won’t feel quite as daunting when it comes.

So maybe augmented reality will be the next big thing. Smart glasses.

Or maybe the next big thing is - finally - ubiquitous computing. When I’m
sitting on my sofa now, working, I am actively looking at _five_ screens. No
kidding. Laptop (for typing), tablet (for video calls). Watch (messages,
notifications). [E-ink screen](https://www.instagram.com/p/B_XYXJOJe3r/)
(yeah, I don’t know either, but I built it and now it’s on the shelf telling
me the time, and I look at it for that). Phone.

The phone is the interesting one. I use it to look up links when I’m writing a
doc or on a call, then copy the link, and then the link magically gets
transferred to my other devices and I paste it into the doc or into the chat.
It is a super regular part of my workflow.

But what I mean is: five screens. Three keyboards. I use them as one device.

Seriously, I need one keyboard.

And if we imagine a world of smart glasses and then working backgrounds, what
do we get? Perhaps…

Honestly I have no idea.

It feels like there’s a bunch of room to do some really interesting things
here, and throwing away QWERTY and/or thumb-typing might open up some really
interesting opportunities that we can’t yet imagine.

Anyway it’s Friday night which means it’s pizza night and I need to go stretch
some dough. I’d be interested to dig around in this more if you know anyone
thinking about it.
