# Poem/1: 48 hours on Kickstarter

![](/home/static/content/2024/02/01/poem1-shelf.jpg)

Poem/1 is on Kickstarter! How has it been going?

I’m not going to go into the whole history here… I made my AI clock prototype
– telling the time with a new poem every minute, every day, composed by
ChatGPT. It made me laugh, I tweeted the pics, it went viral. So after many
twists and turns, I pinned down a route to manufacture, and at 10am London
time on Tuesday I launched it on Kickstarter to fund production.

I have been a _nervous wreck._

**[The whole story is on the Kickstarter campaign
page.](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/genmon/poem-1-the-ai-poetry-
clock)**

You know what? I really do recommend you go read that page, even if don’t plan
on springing for a clock, because I’m super proud of it.

The lo-fi old-school 2012-vibes video at the top, the beautiful industrial
design in collaboration with [Approach Studio](https://approach.studio), the
storytelling, the tiny Easter eggs that one or two people have noticed, the
whole kit and caboodle.

It has also been a joy to collab once again with [Tom
Armitage](https://tomarmitage.com), on the firmware and so much more besides.

**We’re exactly 48 hours in as I post this.**

Overall I need to raise £81,300 to hit escape velocity. The project is already
at 60% funded with an amazing 455 backers and just shy of £50k pledged.

So I’m delighted. My upper-bound goal for the first day was 30% and it reached
48%. Wow. If you’ve backed Poem/1 then thank you so much!

28 days to go. It’s a marathon from here on.

I think about this in cricket terms, like a white ball game. I’ve had a great
power play, now it’s into the middle overs and time to steadily build the
innings – the game can be won or lost there. Then step up through the gears as
we get to the closing stages.

(I think about _everything_ in cricket terms.)

I posted [my first Kickstarter
update](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/genmon/poem-1-the-ai-poetry-
clock/posts/4017397) yesterday where I also posted a pic of the clock with a
serendipitous rhyme:

"Persistence is the key, no doubt. / At 1:37 PM, push through and shout!"

I mean. How does it _know??_

[I updated the press tracking page.](/home/2024/01/25/media)

A couple highlights:

I have a ton to say! I am learning at a million mph. Another time for all
that.

Anyway. Back the campaign if you like, and (of course!) don’t if you don’t
like, we’ll still be friends.

Please do spread the word in your slacks and discords and whatsapps if you’re
happy to. An easy way to get to the Kickstarter campaign is with this say-out-
loud-able short URL: [poem.town/ks](https://poem.town/ks).

Ok let’s see what the clock says right now.

"Unlock your potential, ignite the divine / It’s nine fifty-nine, time to let
your light shine."

I… I feel so _nourished._

As it stands, the Kickstarter campaign for **Poem/1** is 109% funded so it’s
definitely going ahead. Woo hoo! There are only two days to go. _[Check out
the campaign! Back it
now!](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/genmon/poem-1-the-ai-poetry-clock)_

But in many ways, I didn’t make the campaign easy for myself.

There are tropes: high production value ads rattling off features. Or high
design, long pans and ukuleles. Maybe Apple keynote-style black polo necks.

Instead my video was… me at home talking at my webcam.

Halfway through it goes wrong. The tech prototype composes a poem that ends on
the word "teason." Which doesn’t exist.

But I can’t pretend to be what I’m not, right?

And I want to set expectations correctly. If I make out like I’m a big
corporation, then I have to maintain that voice in all the comms and replies
to Kickstarter backers. Hard work.

My first version of the video _did_ attempt to talk about features, design
decisions, and so on. It was boring.

So, when I re-shot, I committed to the bit, recorded 16 minutes of footage
then edited it way, way down. The _“teason”_ moment is totally legit, by the
way. I didn’t plan for that to happen, although I knew I wanted to mention AI
hallucinations.

I actually really enjoyed doing the edit.

I’ve never edited video before. I found my voice by cutting as soon as a point
is made, even in a middle of a word, then I collaged those pieces into a story
that has decent pacing and structure.

But yeah it’s a dumb video. The sound is terrible. It’s fun though, I hope
people enjoyed it.

Here’s one way to do a Kickstarter hardware project:

I didn’t do that. My Kickstarter doesn’t have external funding so the campaign
isn’t just about awareness. The target is the target and I can’t set it low
because I need the margin for the production budget.

Here’s another way:

Well I didn’t want to do that either.

I didn’t want to get close to the goal and then be thinking, \_”oh if I buy
just a few more ads then I’ll hit the target.”’ It’s a slippery slope.

Because my goal for Poem/1 is not just to hit the Kickstarter campaign target.
It is to hit the target with enough margin to:

I would _love_ to do another batch of clocks after this first one. That means
retail and e-commerce. But retailers won’t place larger orders until they’ve
seen an item perform for themselves, and I can’t have any confidence in online
sales until I’ve run a bunch through the funnel. So I need extra units to play
with.

i.e. if I want even the chance of batch #2, then I have a budget to stick to.
I have become very, very protective of the budget.

Now, had the campaign hit its goal after, say, 7 days, instead of with 5 days
to go, would I have used ads at that point? Yes. I have the margin to allow
for that, beyond the campaign goal. I’m not ideologically against ads.

But it didn’t, and having my planned-out budget made the decision easy.

My one piece of planned media was in Fast Company: [This whimsical clock is
the playful gadget AI needs right
now](https://www.fastcompany.com/91015583/this-whimsical-clock-is-the-playful-
gadget-ai-needs-right-now).

It marked the start of the campaign. I wouldn’t have hit go without it. And I
will be forever grateful that the FastCo Design folks saw something in my
pitch and decided to run with it.

But in terms of driving awareness, I relied on community and a gameplan.

The community has been amazing.

Some folks at Kickstarter shared some numbers with me, and they’re super
reliable. You’ll get 20% conversion from a newsletter of organic signups (so I
pushed the [AI Clock substack](https://aiclock.substack.com) in the run-up,
1.6K subscribers); you’ll get 5% conversion from your own socials (probably
20K cumulative), and so on. But also: you need to have clear sight of how
you’re going to get to 80% of your target. I didn’t have that.

Instead what I did was divide the game up into three parts:

It took 3 weeks to climb from 58% funded to 95% funded. It was vital to get
within reach of the finish line.

I built a number of narrative hooks into the campaign to use over that time. I
didn’t know what would grab people’s attention:

Then I had other moments planned, and I used these whenever the conversation
slowed down.

The value of the community is shown with the stretch goals.

I held back the announcement of what the button on top of Poem/1 does. It was
always intended to be for a “Send yourself notes” feature – actually that
feature doesn’t get unlocked till the campaign reaches 111% funded, and it’s
close whether we’ll get there or not!

But then a couple of people suggested that the button should be used to fave
poems.

So I was able to add that! (It unlocked at 101%.)

The evening we got over the line was wild.

I knew that I was due to appear in the main Kickstarter newsletter, so I was
paddling, waiting for the wave, wanting to be in a position to push hard as
soon as it was send out.

At 6pm the newsletter landed in my inbox and I went hard on all socials. Other
people joined in, and it became a true community effort to carry the Poem/1
campaign to 100% and past it. I’ve never felt such energy and support, it was
so, so wonderful.

There were also, other serendipitous moments: I launched an unrelated app, and
it was definitely a consideration in doing so that extra attention could only
help. I thought it might tickle a few people. I didn’t expect that [Galactic
Compass](/home/2024/02/15/galactic-compass) would go viral.

That app is now at 17k installs. I shipped a quick v1.1 that added an ad for
the Kickstarter on the About screen.

Mostly you want as wide a pool of backers as possible, which means shipping
more or less globally.

And really, I should have done that. Driven by setup costs and minimum order
quantities, my campaign goal is $100k which is… punchy. Especially given no
ads. Statistically it’s on the edge between “usually funded” and “usually not
funded”.

But most hardware projects have a team which means that they have capacity to
think about logistics. I don’t.

A principle of mine, all the way through this, has been to keep complexity as
low as possible. I will only promise something if I have clear line of sight
to how I’ll achieve it.

I am aware that there are a ton of people in the EU, Canada and Australia who
would love to back Poem/1. But there’s the paperwork, the import tariffs… all
those unknowns. The more I dug in, the more I found there was more to learn.

So I’m going to keep some clocks back from the initial batch and figure out
how to sell globally at that point, not when I have the pressure of delivering
a campaign hanging over me.

All of these made the Kickstarter campaign _harder._

But I didn’t want - I _couldn’t_ want - a campaign that succeeded in any other
way. That meant that I went into the campaign with a high chance of not making
the goal.

So the most challenging aspect has been _attachment._

I discussed this in an interview with _Workspaces_ newsletter over the
weekend.

But really the most challenging aspect is attachment. My studio is [Acts Not
Facts](https://www.actsnotfacts.com) and though I hope to grow it, it’s just
begun. And bringing connected hardware into the world as a one person studio
is very unlikely. It’s a long process, you can’t push it. You chip forward,
chip forward, chip forward. Maybe it’ll work, maybe it won’t. In any long
project, you develop emotional attachment. You want it. Yet at any given
moment, it probably won’t happen.

How do you maintain looseness in the face of that want and fear? How do you
keep soft hands and an open ear to possibilities and suggestions? It’s hard!

So it sounds counterintuitive but I worked hard to cultivate high passion, low
attachment and sense of humour during the development of Poem/1. I think that
comes across in the Kickstarter campaign!

_(You can also find a picture of my desk setup at that link.)_

Knowing how unlikely this whole process is, I’ve worked hard to make the
project “worth it” at every stage. If it doesn’t get past prototype, it’s
worth it. It stalls out just past industrial design? Still worth it. If the
Kickstarter campaign didn’t make it? Well as long as I did the best by myself
and everyone else who has invested their energy in: worth it.

From that comes lightness.

Work with great people.

I’m very lucky to be working with London-based industrial design shop
[Approach Studio](https://approach.studio) and also long-time friend,
collaborator, and creative hardware engineer [Tom
Armitage](https://tomarmitage.com).

Then there’s everyone who has been generous with their advice, old friends and
new. Working on the AI clock, more or less in the open, has meant that I’ve
found my way to great folks.

Of course the London hardware scene has an astounding depth of experience.
There is a WhatsApp group called literally "London Hardware Mafia" and it’s
true.

In true clickbait style this blog post is

But I don’t think the way I’ve run _this_ Kickstarter campaign would be right
for _all_ Kickstarter campaigns.

It has worked for me and my particular constraints. It’s set up the production
stage wonderfully – there’s now enough in the budget for me to make a China
visit. But that’ll be its own marathon.

What I find heartening is that the Poem/1 Kickstarter campaign has got what
friends have called _2012 vibes._ I leant into an old-school vibe, out of
necessity really. It paid off.

It’s so awesome that Kickstarter still works for that.
