# My AirPods case fulfils an ancient stone knapping instinct

It’s beautiful to walk in the rain plugged into good music with a hot coffee.
The wash of sensations from outside and within brings such a sense of
interiority, and I’m rarely so inside my own thoughts while being hyper-aware
of the world around me.

(It wasn’t intentional. School drop-off followed by coffee, that’s the
routine. The weather happened to be happening.)

So there I am, lost in my own thoughts, and one of the thoughts was, somewhat
recursively,

_this is probably afforded by the coffee,_

in that, because my hands are full with the coffee, I can’t be doomscrolling
on my phone, so instead I’m thinking,

because my hands always have to be holding or fiddling with _something,_ be it
a phone or a cup of coffee,

well not just my hands, everyone’s hands, everyone’s hands are always full,

_huh_ (I thought) _I wonder what Italians do, seeing as they don’t walk with
their coffee but instead stand at a bar and have an espresso before moving
on._

And then I thought, _oh Italians are always gesturing as they speak, that’s
part of the language, that’s why they need a quick coffee before moving on._

Look I didn’t say these thoughts were profound.

Or correct.

The particular track was [a dnb remix of Roads by
Portishead](https://music.apple.com/gb/album/roads-feat-
còmà/1743035421?i=1743035422) by HOSH. Go check it out.

Our hands are always full, right?

Smartphone, coffee. Cigarettes before phones. Newspapers before that, always
being carried.

_Dead time killers,_ is how I’ve always had these filed away. Something to do
so (a) it doesn’t look like you’re loitering and (b) you don’t have to be
alone with your thoughts.

But, in the rain holding my coffee, I wonder whether it’s even simpler than
that?

We just like to have our hands full, perhaps. We just _need_ to, rather.

Or rather, we need to have our hands full and _also_ we like to fiddle – and
ultimately knock things together.

Look, the Pliocene left its mark _somehow._

A million years between the earliest stone tools and the beginning of
language. Then the Pleistocene.

Over 3 million years of knapping stones, all in all.

Sparse tribes bottlenecking down to one or two individuals and growing again…
you don’t want to lose gains every time; evolution bakes hints into the boot
sequence.

I remember sitting and watching the baby pick up blocks and knock them
together.

Now there’s an instinct. What’s going on? Training the cross-modal neurons for
visual and auditory perceptions? Probably some of that, but you could get that
benefit from clapping.

No, it’s stone knapping, I’m convinced.

Retriever dogs are happy when they’ve got something in their mouths. Why not
humans with their hands?

I mean: fidget devices.

It’s a useful point to put into any industrial design brief. _Make sure you
can fiddle with it._

It’s one of the reasons I think that Apple AirPods are so popular: the case is
like a smooth pebble in your hand, and opening and closing the lid has a
satisfying snap and infinite play pushing back and balancing the tension
against the magnets.

The fiddle urge is powerful! And always there.

We could probably quantify it, economically. If you add up the value of the
app economy based on games that you play just to occupy idle hands, work
emails that you wouldn’t reply to till you got to your desk except that you
want to be doing _something…_

…if there was Ozempic-but-for-reducing-stone-knapping-instinct, I wonder how
much of that would simply go away?

But there was something lovely this morning, in the rain and in my own
thoughts, with a coffee and not my phone.

It’s not as easy, sometimes, to be alone with my thoughts as it is to fiddle
with something. I don’t mean because I have difficult-to-tend thoughts – I do
sometimes, like everyone I guess, but not typically. I mean there’s a mini
boredom threshold to overcome before my own thoughts take flight.

We’re not accustomed in the modern era to being micro-bored, in the same way
we’re not used to being micro-hungry. So it’s a gap that is disproportionately
wide to step across.

Again, looking at my kid: she hasn’t yet learnt that boredom is intolerable.
So she pushes through it, and to the other side, and she’ll quite happily
spend a half hour thinking and figuring out new noises to make and practicing
going cross-eyed.

If I were to try something revolutionary, I mean truly revolutionary on a
generational scale, here’s what it would be:

I would sneak a new fiddle urge fulfiller into the national school curriculum.

I wouldn’t plan on teaching kids how to tolerate boredom as they get older, or
how to be more comfortable than previous generations inside their own heads.
Those are unstable solutions.

I mean instead I would work to come up with something in the family of pen
flipping or polyrhythm finger tapping or rolling a coin over the knuckles. Or
I’d invent secular rosary beads or make child-safe whittling knives.

Something like that. Self-contained, not networked. Automatic, with room for
skill, dextrous.

And I’d make sure this new skill was taught and drilled before these kids even
have much conscious awareness, like right when they start pre-school, so it’s
there for them throughout their lives.

_A learnt practice that placates idle hands and leaves our thoughts free._

And so the gravity of the instinct to grasp coffee, cigarettes, phones,
whatever, would be lessened, maybe not by much, just 5%, 10% something like
that, an evolutionary burden 3.4 million years old lifted just a fraction,
relieved Atlas may stretch his tired arms, humans may fly further in the
interiors of their own minds, and I wonder what new thoughts generation beta
could find there.
