# Continuing to think about research labs: 14 references

Following my thought experiment about the [Orthogonal Technology
Lab](/home/2021/01/21/otl) back in January, I have had a ton of conversations
with people generously sharing their perspectives.

So, here’s a collection of some contemporary research labs, as a way of
thinking through which models I personally find most interesting. (I haven’t
spoken with most of these, but they’ve come up in conversation. Apologies if
anyone feels I have miscategorised their lab. I’m using categories only to aid
my thinking.)

As a recap, the goal of my imaginary lab is to

As outputs to this process, new technology and new ventures may be inspired,
and that’s the desire but not the purpose.

And I was trying to figure out the model. That was one of my questions last
time.

**[Other Internet](https://otherinter.net)** is "an applied research
organization in emerging technology."

I keep coming back and looking at this model. It appears to be open, self-
directed research to explore a variety of areas (the website is a series of
public strategy/insight decks), and then that leads into private commercial
collaborations.

(Though if I were to clone and adapt this model, I would need to figure out
for myself what I wanted next stage in the research pipeline to be, and how to
move people towards that.)

**[Ethical Futures Lab](https://www.ethicalfutureslab.com)** aims to "generate
conversations among experts across disciplines [and] to build tangible
examples of ethical futures."

Right now it’s a great biweekly newsletter, which I think is a smart approach:
explore and build an audience, ahead of deeper engagements. So maybe it’s a
baby _Other Internet?_

**[Qualia Research Institute](https://www.qualiaresearchinstitute.org)** is "a
nonprofit research group studying consciousness."

QRI appears to have the scaffolding of a research institute-shaped operation,
some early research, and an advisory board of big names. It is currently pre-
funding. It’s the “go big or go home” model and there’s a lot to be said for
that.

**[Sci-Fi Economics Lab](https://scifieconomicslab.net):** "we nurture and
support new, radical ways to think about the economy and economic policy."

It’s a place to bring unusual projects into the world – like _Witness,_ which
is a collaborative, speculative world building project, documented on its own
Wikipedia. See for example, [The History of
Witness](https://edgeryders.eu/t/the-history-of-witness/15008). The lab is
also a venue for discussion and conferences, so they’re definitely
prioritising influence.

This strikes me as simultaneously the most bonkers result of grant funding
culture and _also_ a lab in its purest form: there is a barely discernible but
real phenomenon on the lab bench, and a group of people have convened to
figure out what it is.

**[Dynamicland](https://dynamicland.org).** "Our mission is to incubate a
humane dynamic medium."

The most fully-fledged public, independent, consumer technology research lab
that I’m aware of. It’s a grand experiment, and a physical environment, aiming
to discover the next paradigm of computing. I mean, it’s amazing. But I
suspect that nobody except the founders (Bret Victor! Alan Kay!!) could have
established it.

**[IDEO’s CoLab](https://www.ideocolab.com)** "connects organizations to shape
technology’s impact on the world. Together, we design the future."

CoLab runs a number of different time-limited research programmes (e.g. Mixed
Reality or Circular Economy) and corporates pay to set challenges to the
research, take part in the collaborations, and have first dibs on the output.
There is also a venture building element.

**[Fast Forward Labs](https://www.cloudera.com/products/fast-forward-labs-
research.html),** owned by Cloudera since 2017, is "an applied machine
learning research group."

From what I understand, companies would subscribe to quarterly research
reports about opportunities in machine learning, plus illustrative prototypes.
[Here’s the blog](https://blog.fastforwardlabs.com) and [here are the
experiments](https://experiments.fastforwardlabs.com). It appears to continue
in a research-led and member-value-add fashion for Cloudera and its clients.

Is this model still viable or did it only fly because true understanding of
machine learning was, back then, very rare?

**[oio studio](https://oio.studio)** is (according to the Twitter bio): "A
creative studio designing future products and interaction."

When agencies are able to maintain their own culture, beyond client
engagements, they’re able to maintain a research-like vibe. I don’t know these
folks, but the public portfolio is one of wildly playful and imaginative
experimental products, and that will buy them space to continue to explore the
same territories even when working with clients, and permission to carry the
ideas out into the world again.

For me, this isn’t quite what I mean by a research lab, but there’s a
similarly of spirit and lot to learn from.

I’m not including startup studios in my list. I think that if the _goal_ is to
spin out startups, either for yourself or for corporate partners, then

However…

One exception, as it’s come up many times, and the model is intriguing:

**[Ink& Switch](https://www.inkandswitch.com).** "We are an industrial
research lab working on digital tools for creativity and productivity."

From the [March 2015 pitch deck](https://www.inkandswitch.com/archive/rdlab-
concept-sketch.pdf) (pdf), this is a lab with a high cadence of rapid research
and prototyping projects, each of which are written up publicly and in detail.
For example [this exploration in sketching ideas on
tablets](https://www.inkandswitch.com/muse-studio-for-ideas.html) was, based
on the response to the published write-up, spun out as the startup
[Muse](https://museapp.com).

(I’m not including “venture building as a service” companies here either. What
I’m focusing on is where direction precedes funding, and the IP isn’t entirely
owned by the client.)

**[SPACE10](https://space10.com)** "is proudly supported by and entirely
dedicated to IKEA - working as an independent research and design lab."

As a lab, it’s highly collaborative, and appears to operate by making precise
interventions within broad themes. For example the [Everyday
Experiments](https://space10.com/project/everyday-experiments/) research
programme (which is about technology in the home) includes this wonderful
collaboration: [Light Gestures](https://www.amostimioyedeji.com/light-
gestures). As a research study into how to interact with smart lights, it’s
thoughtful (great breakdown of the interaction) but accessible (lots of
animated GIFs!). When you have enough of these experiments to pepper the
theme, you’re really getting somewhere. There are also public research reports
and a fellowship programme.

**[BBC R&D](https://www.bbc.co.uk/rd)** and specifically the [Internet
Research and Future Services (IRFS)
team](https://www.bbc.co.uk/rd/sections/internet-research-and-future-
services).

There’s something powerful about researching and prototyping new ways to do
storytelling in an organisation which is always looking for new ways to tell
stories.

**[School of Machines.](http://schoolofma.org)** "We develop unique programs
to teach the latest technologies while simultaneously questioning their usage,
the world around us, and ourselves."

I find this model fascinating. It’s primarily a teaching organisation, to
enable artists with new tools and new perspectives, but the
[projects](http://schoolofma.org/projects.html) are provocative.

**[Freeport.](https://freeport.institute)** "An independent study and
production program led by artists."

Each “lab” has a duration, a theme, and an artistic lead, of sorts, but is
mainly "a place to either expand your existing work and research, or test new
ground."

Generally I’ve not been looking back in time because the context around R&D
has changed so much. But I do think a lot about the historic **artist in
residence** programmes at both Bell Labs and Xerox PARC. These paired artists
(animators, poets) with engineers and found new ways to see the world, and new
applications of technology.

To read more about that, see **[my heavily-linked post about Art + Tech
(2015)](/home/2015/10/13/art_x_tech).** _(I’ve also given that post as a talk
a few times, always internally at companies. There are a lot of pictures and
not many conclusions so it’s a good lunchtime sort of thing. Get in touch if
you’d be interested.)_

I read a tweet the other day (I wish I could find it) which asked why it was
CERN that came up with the web, and DARPA the internet.

Both of these places, suggested the tweet, came up against problems that
nobody else had encountered yet.

So I think that’s one of the jobs of a lab, and it’s why working with artists
works, and why you need both space for orthogonal research but _also_ a way to
engage with corporates or audiences with their own challenges: your goal is
put yourself in a position where you face new challenges, and then report
back.

No conclusions. Lots to learn from the above.

On the corporate side, _SPACE10_ is impressive. Though my own preference would
be for something smaller and more opinionated.

_IDEO’s CoLab_ has managed to pull off corporate collaboration, and that’s
amazing. They have the advantage of being able to cross-sell, and they’re also
able to bring their valuable training capabilities. What if an agency or a
design consultancy were a partner in a lab?

I think the _Other Internet_ model is fascinating. And the membership model of
_Fast Forward Labs._ I wonder about how to blend the two, and whether I could
make the economics work.
