# A science-fictional idea for a geo-scale, lacework power plant

The temperature difference across the U.K. yesterday (600 miles) goes from 11C
in Scotland to -8C in the south east of England – a gap of 19C (34F).

Which seems like a lot?

Anyway I was wondering, if you could somehow short circuit that, could you
generate energy from the heat difference?

It’s a bit of a brain-fart idea. I guess what you’d need is really, really
good heat conductors… like: diamond. Diamond is a great conductor of heat.
Apparently diamonds are known as _“ice”_ because they’re cold in your hand if
you hold enough – they conduct your body heat into the air really efficiently.
Half-remembering here, but I vaguely recall hearing: if you had a diamond
ashtray in your palm and you stubbed out a cigarette, it would feel like
stubbing it out on your skin.

Anyway: so if you could spin a solid diamond pipe hundreds of miles long,
you’d get a heat difference between your local end and ambient temperature,
and maybe you could use that to drive a turbine or something, and make
electricity?

Well why use heat? Go direct to electricity.

There’s something called an [electrodynamic
tether](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrodynamic_tether) which is a long
cable that hangs off satellites. It has been tested a few times. It takes
advantage of the coupling between current, movement through a magnetic field,
and force (the Lorentz force).

You hang the tether out of the back of a satellite, dragging it through
Earth’s magnetic field, and use it in a couple of ways: either you pass a
current through it, in which case it propels (or brakes) the satellite; or you
take advantage of the changing magnetic field and generate electricity.

So imagine an electrodynamic tether but it’s not hanging from a satellite,
it’s draped across, say, the whole of Canada. What would happen?

I mean, I don’t know. BUT: I do vaguely recall that normal EM flux across the
breadth of Canada is large enough such that it’s hard to have a single
electrical grid?

It’s worse during geomagnetic storms, caused by ejection of plasma from the
Sun: the Carrington Event in 1859 is the biggest recorded geomagnetic storm,
and: "The operators of the telegraphs reported receiving electrical shocks,
telegraph paper catching fire, and being able to operate equipment with
batteries disconnected." _(Source:[The Conversation
(2022)](https://theconversation.com/a-large-solar-storm-could-knock-out-the-
power-grid-and-the-internet-an-electrical-engineer-explains-how-177982).)_

It would likely be catastrophic to get a storm of that scale today.

But there are always geomagnetic storms of _some_ magnitude, right? There are
always induced currents in the grid _somewhere?_

And then then’s an energy harvesting technique called [RF
harvesting](https://mnsl-
journal.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40486-017-0051-0):

electromagnetic energy is abundant in space and can be retrieved without
limit. Electromagnetic waves come from a variety of sources such as satellite
stations, wireless internet, radio stations, and digital multimedia
broadcasting. A radio frequency power harvesting system can capture and
convert electromagnetic energy into a usable direct current (DC) voltage.

Hmm.

So let’s add room-temperature superconducting materials to the mix.

As diamond is to heat, superconductors are to electricity. Now we don’t _have_
any room-temperature superconductors yet, but let’s say that DeepMind AI
researchers decide that after solving Go, protein folding, and Tokamak fusion
reactor [plasma wrangling](/home/2022/03/02/wheels), they’ll have a go at
chemistry and metamaterials…

…and they somehow engineer a superconductor that doesn’t need to be actively
cooled, it’s all exotic surface properties or something, so it’s a passive
structure, which is at the very least [not
impossible](https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.1515/nanoph-2017-0115/html),
and then: you weave the superconducting wires using a molecular 3D nano loom
or something, just print them out hundreds and hundreds of miles long.

Pretending for a second you had _that,_ could you do significant RF harvesting
from the everyday variance of the Earth’s magnetic field as driven by the Sun?

You could prototype this with [cooled superconducting
cables](https://www.nexans.com/en/company/Innovation/superconducting-
cables.html) but leave off the EM shielding I guess.

Now imagine a lacework of these superconducting cables over a huge region.

It would be kind of a geo-scale dream catcher for solar EM flux – drape it
over the landscape and it would be a vast and diffuse power plant; plug into
it from anywhere to tap free electricity. Generator implementation details
left as an exercise for the reader.

_(Any physicists capable of running the numbers on this? We should publish!)_

Now this is a pretty science-fictional idea though I doubt it’s capable of
carrying a story on its own.

One of my dreams is to contribute a sci-fi trope to the canon, like space
elevators or tractor beams or rolling roads.

So if you’re an author and you have something on the go, please work in the
geo-scale EM lace as the default power source, just as like background texture
or something, and let’s get it into a few stories, and maybe a kid will read
it and in a few decades we’ll have this for real, or maybe not and that’s cool
too, but please give it a better name.

Okay thanks.
