# Post at 10.20, on Tuesday 19 Aug 2008

Lightning turns the sky into graph paper.
[L--](http://www.upsideclown.com/2000_11_16.shtml "The truth about the
leopard.") shouts 'this way,' and his bright eyes target me with reflected
horizontals and verticals. The thunder plays four/four in my gut. We trip on
curbs and scrape along walls, running - ricocheting - down narrow city lanes.
There's a deeper sound, God making a plosive, the opening of [whale
song](http://interconnected.blogspot.com/2004_03_01_archive.html#108028908289586093 "'the semiotical charge builds up in whales'"), and then light, and I realise
it's another [negentropy](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/ASC/NEGENTROPY.html "'the
complexity of a physical structure in which quantities of energy are invested,
e.g., buildings, technical devices, organisms but also atomic reactor fuel,
the infrastructure of a society. In this sense organisms may be said to become
more complex by feeding not on energy but on negentropy'") bomb, on the next
street. Nothing for a second. In the gloom the city looks identical but raised
to a higher octave. Potential.
[4.](http://twitter.com/genmon/statuses/891910388 "...")
[3.](http://twitter.com/genmon/statuses/891914201 "...")
[2.](http://twitter.com/genmon/statuses/891917596 "...")
[1.](http://twitter.com/genmon/statuses/891918377 "...") Then the world
exhales and [drops into regularity.](http://due-
diligence.typepad.com/blog/2008/08/burkes-law-of-metadynamics.html "Burke's
Law of Metadynamics: 'Systems dump excess energy in the form of structure.'")
A creak as the building next to us attempts to adjust to the sudden order
imposed on its far side. The crystal structure spreads, architecture aligning,
physics gentrifying, roads straightening, square paving slabs unfolding from
one another. Another creak and a slump this time, L-- is caught in dust and
rubble. I crouch over him; there's blood on my hands as I hold his head and
the lightning is the same shape as his body. 'They're homogenising us out of
existence,' he says. His teeth are red. 'Find the
[Deterritorial](http://www.tii.se/reform/inthemaking/files/p16.pdf "Design as
deterritorialization, which also explains the process itself through
example.") [Army](http://www.army.mod.uk/structure/ta/default.aspx "The TA are
effective by using the forces of territorialization: homogeneity; tight
coupling; symbiosis; co-evolution."). Tell them the layers of emergence are
becoming too tightly coupled. Tell them objects are no longer sufficiently
mobile on the substrate. Don't wait.' It smells of wet brick; mysteriously I
think of ferns. L--'s blood is thickening into hexagons. [I turn and
run.](http://interconnected.org/home/2005/06/14/che_guevara_looks "I should
tell you how my adventure with L-- and Che's hands turned out, some day.")
