# There is no After

I like how [Nat Buckley, in their weeknotes](https://natbuckley.co.uk/blog/),
casually refers to **the Before** and **the After**. [For
example](https://natbuckley.co.uk/2020/05/05/weeknotes-68-what-even-is-time/),
"According to my watch I burn slightly more calories than on most days in the
Before."

And it got me chatting on Twitter about what do we call the bit in the middle?

And keeping in mind that _during_ this period, many people have and will still
die, and many people are suffering. And it’s super fucking brutal.

So I don’t mean to brush over that reality, I want to acknowledge that it’s
there, and that one of the characteristics of this period is the mental logjam
of struggling with finding bread flour (for example) while also knowing that
others are struggling in a much more significant sense.

Anyway, I wondered what, in the future when we’re looking back, we’ll call the
_“and”_ between the Before and the After.

Back in 2003 [I asked](/home/2003/01/15/question): "What do you call the bits
between the equilibria in punctuated equilibrium?"

_([Punctuated equilibrium](http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/punc-
eq.html#summary) is a model of evolution which says that a new species appears
all in a rush and a muddle, but once it does appear it then becomes stable.)_

In the course of [collecting suggestions](/home/2003/01/16/some_answers_to) I
started thinking about **habit-breaking days** … I have routines not just
because I’m set in my way, but because everyone _else_ is set in their ways
too. Changing up routines is hard for that reason.

But when everyone changes up their routines around you, changing your _own_
routines becomes easier.

Which led me to think that perhaps there are periods when we all change our
habits _together._

Like now.

Oh yes, some of the suggestions:

So I guess I’ve been thinking about these intermediate periods for some time,
and that’s why I’ve been fixating on it recently.

We used to have a regular big shop at the supermarket, and also pop in
frequently pick up ingredients etc to fill out a particular meal.

Now we get our groceries from a small set of local shops do delivery. It’s a
rewarding way to do be connected to our changed community. The supermarket is
for whatever they don’t carry. Meals are planned around available ingredients.
Food waste, which was always a concern, is now a priority… and almost zero. I
hope that continues.

I used to travel into town for meetings. I used to drink coffee on the train.

I can’t see myself going back to travelling in the After. I’ve got back 2
hours a day and I won’t want to give that up.

And for everything from how I hang out with friends and family, to how I win
work, to how I make time for creative projects, there was what I did in the
Before, and there’s what I anticipate doing in the After…

…and there’s how I’m muddling along today.

The Before, the After, and the muddle?

Kim Stanley Robinson, who writes incredible sci-fi utopias about Mars and
future Californias and also post-climate-catastrophe Earth, had a piece in the
New Yorker the other day: [The Coronavirus Is Rewriting Our
Imaginations](https://www.newyorker.com/culture/annals-of-inquiry/the-
coronavirus-and-our-future).

I mean, read the entire thing, but I wanted to quote this bit because KSR is
some kind of word-smith _magician_ and his sentences and rhythm are
**transcendent**. I’ll give you the lead-in first, but maybe if you’re in a
place where you can, speak the second para out loud because it really really
works.

Memento mori: remember that you must die. Older people are sometimes better at
keeping this in mind than younger people. Still, we’re all prone to forgetting
death. It never seems quite real until the end, and even then it’s hard to
believe. The reality of death is another thing we know about but don’t feel.

_(This is the bit to read out loud. Give the words some room to breathe. Vary
the speed and the sustain.)_

So this epidemic brings with it a sense of panic: we’re all going to die, yes,
always true, but now perhaps this month! That’s different. Sometimes, when
hiking in the Sierra, my friends and I get caught in a lightning storm, and,
completely exposed to it, we hurry over the rocky highlands, watching
lightning bolts crack out of nowhere and connect nearby, thunder exploding
less than a second later. That gets your attention: death, all too possible!
But to have that feeling in your ordinary, daily life, at home, stretched out
over weeks – that’s too strange to hold on to. You partly get used to it, but
not entirely. This mixture of dread and apprehension and normality is the
sensation of plague on the loose.

So good.

Anyway, what KSR puts his finger on is a couple of things,

Possibly, in a few months, we’ll return to some version of the old normal. But
this spring won’t be forgotten. When later shocks strike global civilization,
we’ll remember how we behaved this time, and how it worked. It’s not that the
coronavirus is a dress rehearsal – it’s too deadly for that. But it is the
first of many calamities that will likely unfold throughout this century.
**Now, when they come, we’ll be familiar with how they feel.**

Familiar.

I’ve been thinking a lot about the After…

and thinking to myself, _well, once we get through this…_

But what KSR unlocked for me with that word **familiar** is that the feeling
of the lockdown is now becoming familiar. Familiar means habitual. Habits
don’t change, not without another crisis on the same scale.

We’ve got our childcare routine, and our way of working from home. Our masks
have arrived, we know when to wash our hands.

And what occurred to me, then, is that I’ve been thinking about this all
wrong. There isn’t a Before, a lockdown, and an After. There’s only the
Before, and the lockdown, and the lockdown will last forever.

Yes there will be some loosening of restrictions. We’ll be able to return to
school and work, at least for a bit until there’s a risk of a second peak and
then the lockdown will tighten again for a while.

We’ll be able to visit parents, or go to events, but with masks, and maybe not
in Covid season or something like that. We’ll carry immunity passports. We’ll
have to pay attention to whether the cache of dried goods in the back of the
cupboard is still in date, because we take food supply chains for granted any
longer. The contact tracking apps will never be turned off, governments will
say that it isn’t worth the risk, and we’ll all agree.

National borders will close periodically, like the Thames Barrier – you’ll
never go on holiday or travel for work without thinking of the 1% chance that
you’ll be stranded for the duration. It may never come, and let’s hope it
doesn’t, but we’ll always be watching out for that second peak, it will always
be a few months in the future, shaping our present.

I think about 9/11, almost 20 years ago. That emergency never ended either.

The lockdown itself will reduce in intensity somewhat, but the instruments of
the lockdown will stay, and the psychic lockdown - the _feeling_ of all of
this - will stay too. It will feel familiar.

There’s a bit in _Blue Mars_ by Kim Stanley Robinson (him again) where the
West Antarctic ice sheet collapses, and sea levels the world over rise
dramatically.

“How fast is it?” Nadia said. “Is it a tidal wave?”

“No. More like a very high tide. That will never go away.”

And that’s how I think about the lockdown now. A high tide that won’t go out.
It’ll come and go, a bit, but really this period is just an extreme phase in
what we’ll find is the new normal.

I’m coming to this realisation late, I know, others have been talking about
the new normal for ages.

It’s helping me to think like this, because instead of waiting around - life
on pause - thinking about how to pick things up when things return to how they
were, or keeping my powder dry because things might be different again in the
After, or saying _oh I’ll do that later when thing have settled down,_ I can
start adjusting right now instead.

I can focus on finding new habits, and building my life and my practice in new
ways. I’ll work on discovering new ways to make new routines easier, and
joyful too, and as time goes on there will be opportunities to find new ways
to enjoy family too, and even cricket somehow, but they won’t be the same as
they were in the Before. And I’m going to start figuring these things out
_now,_ because there’s no point holding out to see what it’ll be like when
this is over, because it won’t be over, there’s only the lockdown, the high
tide isn’t going to go out, and there is no After.
