# Video game soundtracks, and a format for adaptive long music

I mentioned **Red Dead Redemption** the other day. Here’s the [original
trailer from 2009](https://youtu.be/PD24MkbHQrc) – it’s a gorgeous game. It
looks and plays like a spaghetti western, which admittedly I’m a sucker for
anyway, but you spend a ton of time just riding around dry plains and watching
sunsets which is kinda perfect. And the _soundtrack_ is :chef’s-kiss-emoji:.

Actually, maybe play the soundtrack now [here on Apple
Music](https://music.apple.com/gb/album/red-dead-redemption-original-
soundtrack/371357204) or [here on
Spotify](https://open.spotify.com/album/22H5XKyHXkxHbty4jtBibg) and listen
while you read this post. For the atmosphere.

Reading about the [making of the RDR
soundtrack](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2010/may/26/red-
dead-redemption-soundtrack) is fascinating. There is apparently 14 hours of
music, and it has to work in loops rather than tracks…

The obvious difference is that film music is written to fit a finite scene,
whereas with the video game, we’re working in five-minute loops. It’s really
wide open, but also very hard, because there are all sorts of things happening
with layers. If the player shoots someone, suddenly the music changes, so we
have to think, ‘okay, does this work over the top of that?’. Also the big
thing with a game is, you don’t know how long you’re going to be staying in
that mood – you can’t state too much, it’s kind of like implying a mood. It’s
a balance between having it interesting, but not so much that you get sick of
it, because you could be riding that horse for 15 minutes…

And so:

Although this gives the impression of a formless improvisational process,
because of the way the music reacts in real-time to the player’s actions, the
underlying structure had to be meticulously planned. If a dramatic sequence
suddenly kicks off, the soundtrack switches to something with greater
intensity, while a more foreboding sound is required during moments of
suspense. All of these loops have to segue into each other as events evolve on
screen. … the whole score is composed in A minor and at 130 beats per minute.

It would be neat to be able to listen to all of this nuance and dynamic
shifting without the need to actually play the game at the same time.

I AM REMINDED OF:

I wonder, when I listen to these soundscapes, whether it would be possible to
make an album that is intended to be listened to over a full 24 hours, as a
kind of live soundtrack to your life?

The temptation would be to make this _functional_ somehow, like it have the
sound of birdsong when you had a meeting incoming, distant barking when an
email in your inbox contains urgent-sounding words, but that’s not really what
I mean. _(Although that’s interesting too.)_

There’s an apocryphal story that the **compact disc** runs 74 minutes because
that’s the length of the longest recording of Beethoven’s 9th symphony.

_(Ignoring the 24 hour version, 9 Beet Stretch, I’m guessing…[which is
wonderful](/home/2004/04/19/leif_inges_9_beet) by the way)._

It turns out the size of the CD is more to do with [data compression, fierce
corporate strategy, and German manufacturing
capabilities](http://web.archive.org/web/20150318132453/http://www.exp-
math.uni-essen.de/~immink/pdf/beethoven.htm) – but it’s a reminder that the
album “format” isn’t inevitable. What we’ve got is contingent on the market,
path dependent on its own history.

And so streaming music apps, royalty calculations, ID3 tags, charts, indie
upload sites, etc, all still perpetuate the album, even - as they are now -
untethered from the physicality of vinyl or plastic disc peppered with
microscopic dots to be read by lasers – all still propping up the old system
just because that’s what everyone else does, like the end of _The Good, the
Bad, and the Ugly,_ nobody able to drop their gun and walk away.

So I wonder what it would take to break that Mexican standoff?

Perhaps…

Amazon could team up with video game publishers via the relationships
established with Twitch, together defining a “soundscape” format for long
music, to be broadcast through Amazon Echoes and wherever the Amazon app is to
be found, initially as a way to publish game soundtracks in a more authentic
form than 74 minute static albums, but really open to _any_ artist, the format
eventually finding its own Brian Eno or Ennio Morricone but actually it’s a 14
year old kid somewhere in the sticks?

How change happens. How new formats are born. I wonder.

I’ve been chatting on Twitter with designer + musician [Matthew Irvine
Brown](http://www.irvinebrown.com) about this, and I think it’s worth saying
that explicitly what I _don’t_ mean is a video game music engine as an app, or
procedurally generated soundscapes… like, there’s a lot of that and it’s
great, but I’m into the idea of a format which is closer to existing albums
but REALLY LONG, with just as much adaption as required to make it so you can
listen all day.

And **by far** the closest I’ve seen to what I mean is Matt’s own 2011-2016
project [Music for Shuffle](http://musicforshuffle.com/sketches/). e.g. [from
the sleeve notes on his first
composition](http://musicforshuffle.com/2011/01/15/sketch01/):

I wrote a series of short, interlocking phrases (each formatted as an
individual MP3) that can be played in any order and still (sort of) make
musical sense.

…which also includes lovely nuggets like: "Doing this experiment meant
thinking about what happens when the listener presses skip – in a sense, they
become a performer."

Matt’s made 22 of these! Whoa.

So… each one is a **shuffle cassette** maybe? The format is a ZIP file hosted
on Dropbox plus a metadata file and an image cover, or maybe a podcast feed
which lists all the individual MP3s, so anyone can make and host them – but so
that each cassette is still recognisably a contained _thing?_ And then perhaps
a player app which can download and play these cassettes?

And perhaps v1 just does shuffle, but then v2 has a couple of simple triggers
like “only play this track if the listener running”.

Maybe for the triggers (and this is slightly absurd but, perhaps?) the
“language” could be [the generative grammar
Tracery](https://github.com/galaxykate/tracery) which is used by [Cheap Bots
Done Quick](https://cheapbotsdonequick.com) for a trillion amazing Twitter
bots, being exactly the right combination of accessible yet expressive?

I’m into this.
