# Lucky meat

_A concept for a vending machine for tea (or coffee)._

I’m totally into the idea that
[witnessing](http://berglondon.com/talks/hills/?slide=37) is a key part of the
experience of vending, maybe even that there’s a [fairytale world inside the
machine.](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iX2xS9vPQ-Y)

But in particular I think that vending machines can be about experiences and
stories.

So tea. Or coffee. Caffeinated beverages are about waking you up.

What you do is you make the entire front face of the vending machine glass,
but it’s a giant glass “V” shape that inclines into itself, so that at the top
of the machine it’s very wide, and lower down at waist height the “V” shape
both narrows and pulls back into itself, tilting back into the machine.

Then when you choose your tea (or coffee), the liquid is shot as if through
the barrel of a gun BANG _directly at your face._ We use facial recognition
computer chips or something for this. It blasts, and splashes, as hard and
fierce as possible. And then the tea (or coffee) is runs down the inside slope
of the “V” and is channeled in and falls eventually into a cup at the bottom
apex where it finally drips in. Then you have your drink. (But you don’t need
it, because you’re already awake.)

The pretence that we tell people is that tea (or coffee) is better aerated,
and the fire-hose of piping hot beverage straight between the eyes is integral
to the process of making it taste awesome. Really it’s about the experience of
it and telling your friends. This is the vending machine I would like to make.

Also I have an idea for a restaurant.

_Lucky meat._

Take 64 steaks, or better: 64 cows.

Divide the cows into two groups, 32 each, and name one _heads_ and the other
_tails._

Flip a coin.

Whichever group of cows loses is butchered and the produce destroyed, rendered
inedible.

Now take the winning group of 32 cows. Divide them in two. Flip a coin. 16
win, 16 are destroyed.

Repeat, repeat, repeat, you have 2 cows. Flip a coin, one wins, destroy the
loser, make steaks out of the winner.

These steaks are from a lucky cow: it has won 6 times in a row, a winning
steak from a winning streak.

By the magic of [tapu](http://berglondon.com/talks/plastic/?slide=24) \- or,
to put it another way, the [Law of
Association](http://www.fyicomminc.com/spirit/laws_of_magic.htm) from the laws
of magic - the lucky meat will carry with it the luck of the animal. By eating
the lucky meat, the eater too becomes lucky. Imagine yourself being presented
with, and eating, lucky meat, knowing that the meat has somehow been chosen,
somehow won the lottery and ended up on your plate! Of course this is also a
commentary on the wasteful nature of agro-industry, or maybe it’s a commentary
on what makes luxury items or the nature of scarcity and the tenuous non-
existence of value, etc. Honestly it’s about meat, when it comes down to it.

I think you could charge a lot more for lucky meat.

Some might argue that none of the cows are lucky.
