# Today’s restaurant reviews

On the eve of the activation of the Large Volition Collider, we speak with Dr.
Giles Spenser about his favourite London restaurants.

_Nando’s_ was a favourite when I was a grad student, so I get to call myself
an old timer.

It’s where we’re meeting now

Yes, and thanks for paying! [laughs]

Seeing people dress up for spicy chicken burgers though… I’m not sure I’m
going to get used to that.

A good last supper before you find out whether your theory stands up?

Yes! Well, yes and no. It’ll be a while before the data is crunched. Not as
long as it took the first time around.

The first time around we didn’t have the computation, it took a couple months
for each run.

This was with Facebook?

Yes, with Facebook. At the time, Facebook was this incredible map of human
activity. Online, of course, and what we called the Internet of Things, that
was all collected into their map too. The Deep Web at the time wasn’t small,
but it was statistically not significant. We wanted social interactions
mainly.

So Facebook was this giant realtime map of enough human activity to be useful.
And once a week, I would run my algorithms across it, looking for signs of
actual human agency in all the changes. For most changes, you can pin down a
cause. A comment is a reply to an article, a video is made because someone
missed their train in the morning and had ten minutes free time to think. We
can pick up that kind of thing from basic EEG and data mining. But some
deltas, some changes in the map that is… some deltas appeared to have no cause
at all – spontaneous action.

Aliens!

That was the clickbait, yes. Shortly before I published, Wow Two had been
detected, so the explanation everyone reached for was that I’d built a new
Seti - a new search for intelligent life - but pointing back at our own
planet, our own internet.

But not aliens, no, although still from space. Volition. I was looking at
particular patterns in social networks, where novelty comes from. There are
correlations. And there’s a time element. New ideas, new actions, spontaneous
human events… these spike at certain positions in the Earth’s orbit, positions
that precess. The view we have now of volition is that it’s the first two
dimensional particle, each a mega-scale skein originating at the central
galactic black hole, orthogonal to the event horizon. Rotating around the core
and rippling, like flags in the wind, trillions upon trillions of them. Where
one of these volition 2-branes interacts with our own patterning, potential is
raised, and new ideas form.

_The Nando’s flagship on Regent St currently has a wait of 2 months. Dinner
and wine for two, approx. £200-300._

This is my supper club, welcome! Our franchise has been going for two years,
we do a weekly dinner. All vegan.

A bit soon, don’t you think?

Maybe, maybe. The Netherlands evacuated Holland what, seven years ago?
[Interviewer: Five years.] Five years ago, is that all. And I know a couple of
families who are part of the first group moving back in. They’re very
positive.

The name does upset some people, yes. But I think it’s okay, my friends don’t
seem to mind.

What’s the best way to get involved?

I joined up without knowing anyone. Bought some suppercoins in the app, earned
a few more by doing washing up duty at a few meets, and I think it took just a
month or two to earn enough for supper myself.

You met your wife…?

Here at _Holland,_ yes. We have an allotment together now, so we earn coins by
providing food too, and by hosting at our flat. Our group is really well
balanced, actually, we’re very proud of that. Self sufficient. We don’t rent
space or buy in service from outsiders at all. I think it’s been over a year
since we need to use any fiat currency. And it’s a good excuse for us to all
meet up, of course.

The question for me, obviously, is what made me sign up that first time?

A volition skein is what made me sign up, it turns out, and when I look back
at the records of my social interactions that day, my patterning was just
right for resonance, and my potential was raised. So here I am.

_To join Holland, visit holland.club to buy a starter pack of suppercoins and
find a supper near you._

This was where it all started?

I was watching a roll coming down the conveyor and grabbed it. Why? Because it
was there. And I realised that it was there because someone else had placed
it, so that action was transmitted between us.

That didn’t seem sufficient somehow - proximate causality but not ultimate -
so I decided to check into it. To keep digging back. Which was easy then, as I
said, because Facebook had mapped so much, before the Deep Web got so
significant. So I was lucky, really, that it was tractable, what I wanted to
test.

So what I’d made, at that point, was a good model of actions and feedback, and
the tight knots that happens. I was double-checking, this action matched
against these ultimate causes, that action matched against those ultimate
causes.

But what I found was that I couldn’t account for some tiny proportion! That
was what I named volition. Volition, I speculated - maybe only a year after
that meal in _Yo! Sushi_ \- is independent from human agency. And if so, it
could be isolated.

And from there to the Large Volition Collider?

The technical work has mostly come from the community, but at its heart it’s
quite simple. The pattern-network we’ve created has been evolved in software,
and printing and testing it has taken almost 18 months, over an area the size
of Oxford near Lake Eyre. For the flatness.

The activation will create a pattern complexity equivalent to, well, not
genius level. But a bright 10 year old in a well-formed environment. Once we
pass through a volition skein - once Earth on its orbit moves through a skein

- the pattern will resonate and we should be able to see the potential rise
  and new ideas form. Real volition. But it’ll take a long time to sift that out
  from the noise of the normal pattern-network operations.

The critics say it’s expensive.

Yes, but what we’re looking for is fundamental particle of consciousness
itself. If we can find that, what might the applications be? New ideas on
demand? Finally identifying the difference between us and the artificial
intelligences?

Personally I think we should look for ripples in the volition skein and
triangulate the origin of Wow Two. See if we can say something back to those
aliens.

Good luck Dr. Spenser.

**Yo! Sushi has 120 London locations. Lunch approx. £100-150. Dinner approx.
£150-200.**

_Follow us for live coverage of the Large Volition Collider, starting tomorrow
at 02:00 UTC[.](http://interconnected.org/home/2008/09/13/volition)_
