# Machine English and why I bake bread for 49 minutes

I always bake my bread for 49 minutes. Reason being that Siri on my Apple
Watch doesn’t understand my accent, and if I say “50” it sets the timer for 15.

I [said this on Twitter
yesterday](https://twitter.com/genmon/status/1325830283283865600), and [Simon
Walters mentioned](https://twitter.com/cymplecy/status/1325865750549106688)
that he programmed Alexa to accept the word “toggle” to control his home media
setup, "but had to change it to accept ‘taco’ instead."

Accents!

Dan Saffer had a good point:

There should be two words/phrases for this. One for making ourselves
“readable” to digital objects and another for the warping of outcomes because
they’re affected by outside digital processes.

And it got me thinking about radio…

There’s a particular accent associated with BBC radio sometimes called _BBC
English_ which is also known as “RP” – _Received Pronunciation._ Back in the
day, it was a upper class, southern English, prestige accent, but then it was
adopted by the BBC in 1922, and that’s what radio sounded like from then on.

So it’s a non-geographic accent; it’s “place” is ageographic radio. _(Is
“ageographic” even a word? Can it be?)_

[Here’s the British Library on the history and features of
RP.](https://www.bl.uk/british-accents-and-dialects/articles/received-
pronunciation)

It turns out the US has something similar with radio voices, which I didn’t
know, but it has a different origin. From _The Atlantic:_ [That Weirdo
Announcer-Voice Accent: Where It Came From and Why It Went
Away.](https://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2015/06/that-weirdo-
announcer-voice-accent-where-it-came-from-and-why-it-went-away/395141/)

There’s an (unattributed) speculation in that article:

The primary reason [for the accent] was primitive microphone technology:
“natural” voices simply did not get picked up well by the microphones of the
time. …

Microphone technology improved enormously in the 40s, but a pattern, a style
of speech in the news and entertainment industries had been set: radio
announcers and broadcasters could, from the late 1940s onwards, speak more
naturally, but those who wanted to “sound like a real newsman” had to affect
the old way of speaking, probably as a way of establishing their bona fides…

Bad microphones lead to a specific accent; accent becomes a marker of
gravitas; mics get better but accent persists.

Going back to Saffer’s point:

The starting point is about us making ourselves "readable" to machines, and
that’s where the accent comes in

_BUT THEN,_ as he says,

there’s this “warping” of culture that occurs from then on – the legacy of
janky microphones or the standards manual that results in an accent that
endures decades later.

Back to my baking:

There’s a good chance that Siri got better in the most recent software update,
and perhaps it can now discern “50” and “15” in my voice. But I’ll never know.
I now have a habit of saying "hey siri set timer for 49 minutes" – even if
Siri has improved, there’s no moment for me to discover that. So I’ll carry on
baking my bread for 49 minutes forever.

AND SO:

Will we see, alongside Cockney, Indian English, Mid-Atlantic, Estuary English,
and all the rest, a new accent of _Machine English_ which is ageographic,
placeless, that we all keep in our repertoire to be understood by not-quite-
good-enough voice-controlled objects?

And, even when Siri and Alexa and all the rest _are_ good enough, will we
carry on speaking with it?
