# The map room is a physical room-size wiki for collaboration from the 1950s

There’s an idea from the 1950s about physical rooms and index cards for shared
context and collaboration.

And thinking about how to make a modern version gets me thinking about room-
scale group use computers, and what kind of interfaces we’ll need.

No conclusions today, but thinking out loud…

Consider a room!

It’s 1954 (or 1955) and a group of disciplines are working together on a
complicated decade-long regional development plan for the Hacienda Vicos
community in Peru. Represented: anthropology, economics, political science,
and psychology.

How do they find a common vocabulary? How do they share data and ideas? How do
they plan action?

Enter the **map room.**

whose walls contained a large matrix with the time (in years) on the ordinate
and with the “variables” the group was interested in along the abscissa.

Here’s the paper: **[Administration of Research in a Research
Corporation](http://worrydream.com/refs/Kennedy%20-%20Administration%20of%20Research%20in%20a%20Research%20Corporation.html)**
by Kennedy & Putt, RAND Corporation Report No. P-847, April 20, 1956.

_(It’s an important paper, and I’ll say why later.)_

Variables, and index cards:

130 variables, grouped under “government,” “economics,” “social relations,”
“education and mass media,” “health and welfare,” and “attitudes.” There were
spaces for three-by-five cards for each of ten years under each variable. The
entire matrix thus could hold 1,300 cards that summarized the value of the
variable in the past or described its desired value for the future. At the top
of each column was a description of the value of the variable “in the best of
all possible worlds” and a statement of the value anticipated or desired at
the end of the ten-year experimental period (1951-1961).

Data and planning:

The contextual map records past decisions and actions as well as predictions
and anticipated reactions for the future.

The room is architected for discussions and decisions, not just visits:

The map room contained a conference table and chairs so that decision-making
and planning conferences could be held there. Thus the group was continually
confronted with the developing map and the members were constantly aware of
gaps in the information and suggested priorities for items to be considered.

Thus:

The map was a large, living memory for the group.

Other observations about the map room:

It’s a compelling concept for collaborative, open-ended work!

That was 1955. What could we do in the 2020s, with hybrid environments,
networked computers, and embodied interaction?

First, a digression.

So the project for which the map room was created was the “development” of
Hacienda Vicos, a 2,500 person, 22,000 acre community on the slopes of the
Andes in Peru.

It’s described as a "complex interacting cultural system" – long-standing
custom involved households dedicating some portion of time and labour to the
community, with them subsisting on land held in common. I don’t doubt that
life would be hard, but none-the-less it sounds like rich and meaningful
mutualism.

Yet, the paper says without further discussion, it is “recognised” that the
hacienda is an “anachronism” and has to go in the face of modern technology
like hydroelectrics, trucks, schools, and communications.

Worse, it looks like the map room itself was physically located not in Peru
but in ~~Stanford~~ Cornell, and the copies of the contextual map were made to
be used? imposed? in the field in the hacienda itself.

It’s horrific colonialism.

The opportunity to _ask_ the hacienda community how and _if_ it wanted to
change was right there. New technology could have been added to the community
matrix – or not!

The map room would have been the perfect forum for the decisions.

And I’m pleased to discover, on some light googling, that the Hacienda Vicos
“project” is regarded as “controversial.”

Anyway.

With that giant looming caveat, back to map rooms.

The map room holds a contextual map: the matrix of index cards.

The contextual map is put forward as a technique for a multidisciplinary group
to find a _conceptual framework._

What is a conceptual framework and why does it matter?

Let’s look at one: **[Augmenting Human Intellect: A Conceptual
Framework](https://www.dougengelbart.org/content/view/138)** by Douglas
Engelbart, 1962.

This is the paper that unlocked ARPA funding when JCR Licklider read it, and
set out the research programme that led to the invention and demo of the
personal computer, the mouse etc in 1968 in [The Mother of All
Demos](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mother_of_All_Demos)

To my mind, the 1962 paper hinges on two meta-principles.

The first is that Engelbart adopts the framing of a conceptual framework at
all.

Kennedy & Putt, for the RAND Corporation in 1956, set out to summarise how to
build an effective research organisation.

They identify that different disciplines will tend to follow their own groove:
"Research specialists, like all other living organisms, will go to great
lengths to maintain a comfortable position."

And therefore answers will remain “unintegrated.” True cooperation will not
occur.

The requirement, they say, is for a framework

Something that can cut across disciplines; that all feel like they are
contributing to.

Engelbart reads this paper! It unlocks something for him.

From Engelbart’s own oral history of his work (which is worth read in its
entirety)…

Then I discovered a great little RAND report written by Kennedy and Putt that
described my situation marvellously and recommended a solution. Their thesis
was that when launching a project of [a new discipline] the researcher would
encounter consistent problems in approaching people in established
disciplines. They wouldn’t perceive your formulations and goals as relevant,
and they would become disputative on the apparent basis that your positions
were contrary to ‘’accepted” knowledge or methods. The trouble, said these
authors, was that each established discipline has its own ‘’conceptual
framework.” The enculturation of young professionals with their discipline’s
framework begins in their first year of professional school. Without such a
framework, tailored for the goals, values, and general environment of the
respective discipline, there could be no effective, collaborative work.
Furthermore, if such a conceptual framework did not already exist for a new
type of research, then before effective research should be attempted, an
appropriate, unique framework needs to be created. They called this framework
creation process the ‘’Search Phase.’‘

_So, I realized that I had to develop an appropriate conceptual framework for
the augmentation pursuit that I was hooked on._ That search phase was not only
very sweaty, but very lonely.

The result is his 1962 paper. Kennedy & Putt is number 1 in the references.

What was Engelbart’s eventual framework?

Well it’s fully about augmented human intellect, and read his paper for that,
but here is the second of the two meta-principles: he followed JCR Licklider
in atomising knowledge-worker activity. (Yes, Licklider who went on to fund
Engelbart. What else could he do?)

[I talked about this before:](/home/2022/11/04/somaforming) Licklider had
analysed his own thinking process, and discovered that 85% of the work was
searching, calculating, plotting, transforming, and so on… bureaucratically
“preparing the way”.

As Engelbart put it: "Every process of thought or action is made up of sub-
processes" – and that bureaucratic work is tractable to computed-aided
support.

Licklider published his work in _Man-Computer Symbiosis_ (1960) and that’s
Engelbart’s reference #15 – to my mind, it is this approach that uniquely
leads to the functionality in the demo and eventually “tools for thought”
generally, and is the heart of the _“augmenting”_ conceptual framework,
unlocking the required multidisciplinary work of engineers and psychologists.

Engelbart’s _“very sweaty, very lonely”_ slog to his framework is what the map
room concept was intended to short-circuit – why make that journey alone when
you can do it together?

**And that’s why I’d like to find ways to reinvent the map room today,**
because we _do_ need new multidisciplinary conceptual frameworks, and it would
be cool to have new tools to help us to get there.

Let me rattle through a few other immersive information rooms so we have some
references!

**SAGE** (1958)

[Here’s my history of SAGE](/home/2021/12/21/sage): the massive computing
project (3x the size of the Manhattan Project) that preceded the PC, brought
in the interactive computer, and gave us a glimpse of group computing which is
so far unrealised.

On the third floor at each of the 24 Direction Center buildings, _The Pit:_

Each of the men (yes all men) has their own computer console at their desk.
But they’re working together around the PDU. One of the men is holding what is
either a light gun or a laser pointer/equivalent. They’re assessing potential
threats and ordering missiles and bombers. Together.

And:

This isn’t a setup for presentations and discussions. It’s for collaboration
and action. The whole room is an environment for the team to work.

Group use. Shared context.

And from there we can go Nasa’s flight control centers, or NORAD in the movie
_WarGames_ – but I’m more interested in the individual/small group rooms.

**The Knowledge Box** (1962)

In 1962, experimental designer Ken Isaacs imagined and constructed a
‘knowledge box’, a compressed environment for experiencing ‘culture’: a cube
of wood, masonite and steel equipped with twenty-four slide projectors and
audio-suppliers.

_Life Magazine_ is quoted:

Inside the knowledge box, alone and quiet, the student would see a rapid
procession of thoughts and ideas projected on walls, ceilings and floor in a
panoply of pictures, words and light patterns, leaving the mind to conclude
for itself. It is a machine of visual impact that could depict, for example, a
history of the Civil War in a single session, or just as easily give a waiting
astronaut a lesson in celestial navigation.

The photos at the above link are ASTOUNDING.

Just for individual use but so immersive!

It reminds me of the brainwashing machine in The Ipcress File from 1965.

I want to have a go.

**Project Cybersyn** (1970)

The Operations Room:

It was a hexagonal space, thirty-three feet in diameter, accommodating seven
white fibreglass swivel chairs with orange cushions and, on the walls,
futuristic screens.

… Four screens could show hundreds of pictures and figures at the touch of a
button, delivering historical and statistical information about production-the
Datafeed-but the screen displays had to be drawn (and redrawn) by hand, a job
performed by four young female graphic designers.

Same belief in human collaboration, same belief in context. Same mid-20th
century, uh, awkward politics.

btw the architectural aesthetic: "The room was designed by Gui Bonsiepe, an
innovative German designer who studied and taught at the famed Ulm School of
Design, in Germany, and industrial design associated with the Ulm School
inspired Steve Jobs and the Apple designer Jonathan Ive."

**But before any of these, even before the original map room…**

…there was the Prime Radiant of Isaac Asimov’s _Second Foundation._

Published as a novel in 1952, and based on the novellas in _Astounding_
magazine in 1948-1950, this was Asimov’s science-fictional user interface for
Seldon’s Plan, the map of the present and the future of the galaxy according
to the science of psychohistory.

[the Plan] is projected on the wall as a network of dense, interlocking
equations by a device named the “Prime Radiant,” and manipulated using a
combination of gestural interface and thought control.

[I pulled out relevant passages
here.](/home/2012/03/13/user_interface_of_seldons_plan)

The Prime Radiant isn’t just a device – "Consider a room!" Asimov begins. It’s
a forum for the “guardians” of the Plan to discuss together and make decisions
together. Shared context and interactivity! Collaboration!

And I wonder how much influence in the imagination this “technology” had? Did
RAND researchers read _Astounding?_

I can’t remember if I’ve shared this before but my mental model of modern
collaboration tools is that they fall into two camps.

**Ephemeral** tools are about the conversation. Slack is one. Zoom is another.
Google Docs, weirdly, is another, even though it’s all about files. There’s no
shared “front page” to Google Drive and no Schelling Points for team members
to gather around, so all documents are temporary working documents (and doing
otherwise is pushing water uphill).

**Accretive** tools build over time. Developer tools tend to work like this:
platform-as-code. Wikis are the main one: [Notion](https://www.notion.so) is
accretive. (I love Notion.) Pipeline-based tools like Trello fall on the
accretive end, for me – memory resides in the tool, not the users. Accretive
tools need gardening because they don’t forget by default.

I’m not sure these are the right terms. Maybe: [stock and
flow](https://snarkmarket.com/2010/4890/)?

Maybe: _oral and literate?_ I also feel like you get two cultures of
organisations. Oral orgs believe that knowledge resides in individuals, and
they are forever emailing each other and having meetings and making custom
decks. It allows for expertise. Literate orgs treat people as interchangeable
parts and scurry over shared edifices – but they build cathedrals.

Anyway.

Map rooms, in my terminology, are an accretive tool.

They are shared "living memory" – external from individual skulls.

Which is what, say, Notion does.

But the map room also provides the _overview._ (As does the Prime Radiant!)

I was playing with this idea recently, in a tiny way, when I was [mapping my
posts about the multiplayer web](/home/2022/11/09/map).

My learnings were that (a) maps should be authored not generated
automatically; and (b) the map is a separate and just as valuable artefact as
the territory that it maps.

So, imagine something like Notion, but

That’s not just “whiteboard” view, for me. There’s more.

Yes I know agencies have “war rooms” with post-its for project management and
concepts for #brands all over the walls. But that’s a technique out of the
1950s it turns out – I mean, could we bring the technology of map rooms into
the 2020s?

Something software-enabled, something multiplayer, something that embraces
_“hybrid”_ so we don’t have to be either all in one geographic location or all
at home.

I think embodiment matters here?

It matters, in the map room, where you’re standing. It matters, in the map
room and in the palace of memory simultaneously, that you can focus on some
details and discard others because they’re in peripheral vision or behind you,
or remember where you spotted something. It matters, in the map room, who
you’re near. It matters if you see somebody lingering near an index card that
you happen to know something about, and you can walk over and talk to them
about it. All of that!

**So in my imagination Map Room 2.0 looks something like this…**

Consider a room with a projector that shows an overview of your whole “map”.
Maybe, just like the original map room, it’s a matrix of variables and time.

We all have that projector: me in my home office, and you in yours, and the
others in the office meeting room. We navigate the map with gestures. It shows
the same view for everyone. We don’t all need the identical physical setup –
the projector can be large or small or point at any wall.

For looking closer, we use our phones and tablets. Those are individual.

But there’s some kind of equivalent to embodiment (and presence and
proxemics): the system has gaze detection… it knows where you’re looking. And
it also knows what index card you’re examining on your personal device.

Gaze and individual browsing are shown as icons on the shared map, like seeing
coloured cursors in a Google Doc. Maybe the icon, or cursor, gets bigger if
the viewer is standing closer to their projection.

More hardware peripherals: everyone wears earbuds + mic. There’s proximity
audio so, if you’re in the main shared space, you can hear remote people who
have their cursors near where you’re looking. There’s a “shout” button that
speaks to the whole room.

So it’s wiki-like software, with multiplayer cursors and a virtual spatial
metaphor, plus overview maps, and there’s hardware to make a hybrid tele-
environment for everyone participating.

Something like that.

A new map room.

It’s useful talking through the above because it’s hard for me to do so – it
feels difficult to reason about a new map room because I can’t (yet) imagine
what a physical computing environment should _be._ Not with much resolution.

What are the primitives, like the equivalents to the windows, icons, menus,
and pointers? How would people use it together? How would the various
input/output modes braid together? What’s the conceptual framework for _that?_

And this is [a topic I’ve circled before](/home/2021/12/21/sage):

WHAT IF, instead of the Personal Computer, the dividend of SAGE had been the
Team Computer?

A computer that wasn’t used individually but as a group, together in a room or
perhaps remotely. Not desktops but environments. An alternate history of
computing that doesn’t involve user IDs or ownership as primary concepts but
is instead oriented around collaborative, co-created artefacts, spaces that
are jointly inhabited.

As useful as a 20XXs map room would be, it feels like first I need to spend
some time exploring computing environments in general.

Another time.
