# Marx at 193

Some choice quotes from [Marx at 193](http://www.lrb.co.uk/v34/n07/john-
lanchester/marx-at-193) by John Lanchester.

Empiricism, because it takes its evidence from the existing order of things,
is inherently prone to accepting as realities things that are merely evidence
of underlying biases and ideological pressures. Empiricism, for Marx, will
always confirm the status quo. He would have particularly disliked the modern
tendency to argue from ‘facts’, as if those facts were neutral chunks of
reality, free of the watermarks of history and interpretation and ideological
bias and of the circumstances of their own production.

On the origin of value, "In Marx’s judgment surplus value is the entire basis
of capitalism: all value in capitalism is the surplus value created by
labour." And so Marx "creates a model which allows us to see deeply into the
structure of the world, and see the labour hidden in the things all around us.
_He makes labour legible in objects and relationships._"

Lanchester digs into Facebook and into airport check-in:

This idea of labour being hidden in things, and _the value of things arising
from the labour congealed inside them,_ is an unexpectedly powerful
explanatory tool in the digital world. … When you start looking for this
mechanism at work in the contemporary world you see it everywhere, often in
the form of surplus value being created by you, the customer or client of a
company. Online check-in and bag drop at airports, for example. … They’re
transferring their inefficiency to the customer, but what they’re also doing
is transferring the labour to you and accumulating the surplus value
themselves. It happens over and over again. Every time you deal with a phone
menu or interactive voicemail service, you’re donating your surplus value to
the people you’re dealing with. _Marx’s model is constantly asking us to see
the labour encoded in the things and transactions all around us._

Sidenote: I have an objection to the [Dyson
Airblade](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dyson_Airblade) in that previous
generations of hand-driers encouraged me to move and play with my hands,
attempting to find for myself some kind of expertise or intelligence in
drying, but the Airblade, in order to achieve _its own efficiency_ forces all
of its users to adopt identical movements, removing autonomy from millions to
save money for the owners of the establishments in which it is installed. I
have been roboticised.

Back to Lanchester: the rest of _Marx at 193_ covers the variety of
capitalisms developed since his work, the limits of natural resources, China
and Mass Group Incidents, "basically anti-authority riots which occur
regularly all over China and seem never to be reported in the Western
mainstream media," and this nugget about life expectancy:

UK life expectancy is now over eighty and rising so sharply that buried in the
statistics is a truly strange fact: a woman who is eighty today has a 9.2 per
cent chance of living to be a hundred, whereas a woman of twenty has a 26.6
per cent chance. It may seem weird that the person sixty years younger has a
three times better chance of making it to a century, but what it shows is just
how fast progress is being made.

Read the [whole thing.](http://www.lrb.co.uk/v34/n07/john-lanchester/marx-
at-193)

Lanchester’s article is in the current issue of the _London Review of Books_
which is a total treat. Another joy is Thomas Jones’ review of two biographies
of David Bowie/Ziggy Stardust, [So Ordinary, So
Glamorous,](http://www.lrb.co.uk/v34/n07/thomas-jones/so-ordinary-so-
glamorous) which is a must-read for the whole story but also for this
simultaneous smack-down and correction: "Trynka doesn’t often go into details
about the music, which is perhaps just as well. In his discussion of ‘Starman’
he talks about its ‘opening minor chords’ when they’re nothing of the kind,
and says that ‘the key changes from minor to major’ at the chorus. But there’s
no key change, and it’s important that there isn’t: the effect Trynka’s
hearing, the sense of ‘release’ and ‘climax’ he gets when the chorus kicks in,
would be lost if there were. What happens is that for the first time, the
melody hits the tonic; _Bowie gets through 15 bars in F major without singing
an F, and then on the word ‘starman’ he hits two of them, an octave apart._"
BANG!

Here’s [Starman, live in 1972,](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sz0XIiIlATE)
and listen out for that avoidance of the F and then suddenly when you hear it.
Wow.
