# Recipes for tandoori masala and chaat masala

It’s been sunny which means it’s BBQ season which means I need my chicken
tikka fix which means it’s spice mix time.

Here are [some pictures on my
Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/p/BxJso91Jm7x/).

I posted the [garam masala
recipe](http://interconnected.org/home/2014/12/31/garam_masala) I use back in
2014 and I still use the same one. It’s a great spice base, lots of texture,
and I like the balance–it’s not too peppery (which I find shop-bought ones can
be).

(This isn’t required for tikka but included here for completeness.)

I’ve adapted my tandoori masala blend from this [chicken tandoori recipe on
NDTV Food](http://food.ndtv.com/recipe-tandoori-chicken-232839). I like it to
have a BBQ taste to it, and that’s done by going heavy on the cinnamon,
fenugreek, and onions. I only recently discovered that British Indian curry
houses absolutely load their dishes with dried fenugreek, and for better or
worse I find the distinctive flavour really more-ish.

I feel like there should be paprika but I’m on the fence about the sweetness
it would add. I’m still iterating this mix so maybe I’ll include some next
time.

There’s no chilli. I add that separately.

The recipe:

Prep: Toast (keep moving around in a hot, dry pan) until the aromas come out
but careful not to burn. Leave in a dish to cool. Use a coffee grinder to
grind though not the one you use for actual coffee.

Chaat masala gives the tikka its distinctive tang, and that come mainly from
amchoor. I’ve previously just bought chaat masala but substituted it pretty
regularly (when I’ve run out) with amchoor or just citric acid.

So this summer I figured I would make my own blend and I’ve based it on [this
recipe](https://www.thespruceeats.com/chaat-masala-recipe-1957584):

Prep as above.

I use these two blends to make chicken tikka. The marinade I use is from [that
NDTV Food recipe](http://food.ndtv.com/recipe-tandoori-chicken-232839) above
but I’ll repeat it here for reference:

Add the marinade to cubed chicken thighs, paneer, or shrimp. Mix well and
leave in the fridge for a few hours or overnight. Cook as kebabs under the
grill or on the BBQ.
