# So I went outside and we’re all wearing masks now

I went out in public this morning for the first time in about four weeks, and
tons of people are wearing masks. (We’re fine but our household has been
isolating all that time: first after an _encounter_ and, just as that stint
ended, the toddler had an unexplained fever.)

Two other things:

**It’s hard to see and show emotions in a mask.** A thumbs up or a yell of
thanks is easy enough, but how do you walk down the street and look friendly
and approachable? Or at least, 1.8m approachable.

**Avoiding people is weird.** You step out into the street, or wait for them
to move along, but in terms of proxemics it’s very unusual to take such care
to keep another person at a far-social-almost-public distance. 6ft/1.8m is
outside the [comfortable conversation distance](/home/2003/10/27/actually) of
1.6m. So I’ve a hunch that what happens is that you take the evasive action,
and then _afterwards_ you feel a flush of the emotion that would usually
precede it – a vague sense that the person _needs_ to be avoided, classic
[post-rationalising confabulation](https://aeon.co/ideas/why-is-the-brain-
prone-to-florid-forms-of-confabulation). Then I catch myself treating the
other person in a way that is consistent with that emotion, like it would be
somehow hypocritical to first steer clear of them but then give a friendly
hello.

But maybe these two points are connected? A mask means the smile isn’t seen
and actually it’s harder to make too: the mask holds my face in place, just a
touch. And maybe a smile not made is also a smile not felt?

[Keith Johnstone](https://www.keithjohnstone.com)‘s **Impro** is a book of
theatre techniques based around improvisation and when I read it in 2008 I
found it _life changing._ [This summary on
Ribbonfarm](https://www.ribbonfarm.com/2010/01/23/impro-by-keith-johnstone/)
is a decent taster.

The first three chapters are called Status, Spontaneity, and Narrative Skills
and they’re great but also they make sense.

The third chapter is called **Masks and Trance** and reading it is an
unsettling experience, in the
[Lovecraftian](http://www.hplovecraft.com/writings/texts/fiction/cc.aspx)
sense of there being infinitely more to the world that we know or, for that
matter, could handle.

The reason why one automatically talks and writes of Masks with a capital ‘M’
is that one really feels that the genuine Mask actor is inhabited by a spirit.
Nonsense perhaps, but that’s what the experience is like, and has always been
like.

And:

A Mask is a device for driving the personality out of the body and allowing
the spirit to take possession of it.

It all sounds unbelievable until you _try_ a Mask, and allow yourself to let
go just a little.

How to do it:

… make your mouth fit the Mask and hold it so that the mouth and the Mask make
one face.

[Here are some of my favourite quotes.](/home/2008/02/09/impro)

I have a vague and hand-wavey rationalisation of the Mask… we’re social
animals, and when we change the way we’re seen and interacted with, that
reflects back into the psyche, blah blah blah.

But the fact remains that **wearing a Mask is a terrifyingly powerful
experience** \- seriously TRY IT - and actually a pretty good shorthand to
talking about what’s going on is to simply say that, _yes,_ these inanimate
objects carry their own personalities, and, _yes,_ when you wear one, that
personality possesses and changes you.

So like I said, I went outside today, and it turns out a ton of us are wearing
masks now.

And I wonder, what personality does a mask/Mask have when it’s

and how do those spirits possess the wearer? And what happens to a community
when, almost overnight, these personalities come into the mix?

And what about the Twitter mask, and the Facebook mask, and the email mask,
these other masks we wear online which hide our faces and possess us with
_their_ spirits? How might we notice them, and how might we describe them, and
what do they do, and who do we become?
