# How about Meal Kits for fashion

One of the food innovations of the pandemic has been Meal Kits: courier-
delivered, high-end food, prepared in a restaurant kitchen and finished at
home.

For me, a meal qualifies as a Meal Kit vs a traditional delivery if it ranks
these two points above convenience and cost:

There’s an art to making the meal prep foolproof. So the sauces are pre-
prepared and pre-bagged, and you have to heat separately. And fats for any
frying are provided in tiny baggies because you might not have the best grade
of butter at home. Etc. It’s not totally foolproof. I can still screw it up,
and that’s part of the experience.

There’s a question about they will survive as restaurants re-open: [Are Meal
Kits Going Back in the Box?](https://london.eater.com/22300712/restaurant-
meal-kits-uk-when-restaurants-reopen-after-lockdown) (This is a great article
on _Eater London_ with a ton of links to good kits.)

So these are _not_ the same as, say, [Tovala](https://www.tovala.com) which is
a subscription food service combined with a smart oven that reads the barcode
and cooks your dinner for you. Nor Blue Apron/HelloFresh/and so on which
provide recipes and weekly ingredients boxes.

Meal Kits: Access x quality > cost x convenience.

I have a few friends who sew. I read their blogs and see their pics and I am
_entranced._ Whereas: I buy my clothes from Uniqlo.

Actually clothes are an interesting one. As Benedict Evans pointed out
recently, [e-commerce in UK has jumped considerably](https://www.ben-
evans.com/benedictevans/2021/4/25/step-changes-in-ecommerce) \- the UK has
_50% higher penetration_ than the US - and we’re seeing new behaviours.
Example: I know some folks who buy two sizes of every garment, for two people
in the house. The person who likes it most keeps the one that fits, all the
rest are sent back. The traffic in returns is enormous. It feels like the
system is not meeting needs elegantly.

So… what are Meal Kits for sewing? High fashion, hard to source fabrics, home
finished for perfect tailoring?

How could tailoring be made foolproof? An interesting challenge.

And: Meal Kits for what else?
