# The sound and the fury of asinine automated tannoy announcements

Today I’m allowing myself to be a pedantic nit-picker. Really embracing that
side of me.

And I’m wondering how to push back against mundane nits, even though I’m aware
that it makes me sound like I’m over-sensitive and focusing on the wrong
things.

Because the tiny things _really do_ matter, and I’m reminded of that because
I’ve spied at least one mechanism where a small change has a larger cultural
impact.

The example is in social media…

"What is happening?!" – that’s the prompt that X/Twitter gives you in the post
input field.

"What’s on your mind, Matt?" – that’s what Facebook says to me.

This is some kind of manifestation of brand, I had imagined. I hadn’t thought
about it very much. I guess the wording has an effect what the social network
is like, but I wouldn’t have given that much weight.

EXCEPT: the “nudge” acts strongly with neurodiverse people.

[Here’s a paper about
it](https://dl.acm.org/doi/fullHtml/10.1145/3491102.3517596) (detailed ref
below):

[Our Autistic young adult participants] interpreted feature descriptions such
as “people you may know,” “what’s happening?,” “what’s on your mind?,” and
“write a comment,” as a direct statement to themselves to act upon.

That UI microcopy that I parse as at-best lightly encouraging me to behave in
a particular way is treated by at least some people as a strong instruction.

Again:

we observed that young Autistic adults took prompts to share information at
face value and followed these suggestions as directives. For example,
Participant3 explains the reason for sharing her contact information on her
profile: “I had to do that because when I made my account it said phone number
or email.”

This is so illuminating to me.

_Ref._

Page, X., Capener, A., Cullen, S., Wang, T., Garfield, M., & J. Wisniewski, P.
(2022). [Perceiving Affordances Differently: The Unintended Consequences When
Young Autistic Adults Engage with Social Media. Proceedings of the 2022 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3491102.3517596), 1-21.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3517596

Let me extrapolate.

So hand-waving a bit here, 2% of a social app’s audience taking user interface
copy _literally_ is a good way toward having actual cultural change. You get a
bunch more via mimesis, a bunch via algo nudges, and so on. But neurodiverse
people get you a quarter of the way there!

I had PREVIOUSLY imagined that culture changes because EVERYONE shifts
behaviour a LITTLE.

But NOW I see a mechanism whereby a VERY SMALL cohort changes their behaviour
ABSOLUTELY and perhaps that drags along the rest.

Which seems plausible?

Anyway, I would love to understand more how/whether neurodiverse people have a
critical role as a cultural vector, online and elsewhere, disproportionate to
population.

Thinking like this has made me appreciate, even more, that apparently
innocuously choices MATTER culturally, even when I can’t imagine the actual
mechanism.

So I’ll go into two such apparently innocuous examples

Here are two incidences with signage that I spotted on my travels in the last
few days.

**London Bridge**

At London Bridge station this morning, an automated announcement over the
tannoy: "Due to weather conditions the surfaces around the station may be
slippery."

I mean… yes? It’s raining a little? So… of course??

It is fascinating to contemplate the complex of considerations and sign-offs
that brought this automated announcement into existence and maintain it.

I can’t imagine it stops people slipping over. And I can’t imagine it would
function as a protective shield in court against negligence.

I _can_ imagine, on the other hand, how it came into being! Somebody is trying
to be nice or helpful, and nobody has an argument against adding the
announcement to the roster. Or it’s a health & safety thing, an individual
being extra keen, or maybe it’s aimed at staff (not travellers), but there was
no lawyer in the room to say _“nah that’s actually not a functional defence.”_

But. To my mind, the automated tannoy announcement is corrosive:

Society, in this case, becomes an diffuse helicopter parent.

**Gatwick Airport**

There are some gorgeous, huge, bright screens in Gatwick Airport now, used for
way-finding and (of course) ads. You can barely tell they’re screens.

In fact these screens fulfil the function of regular static signs, and have
displaced those old signs: there’s a big yellow block that says “Toilets.”

Some of the time.

A minute later, that part of the large screen changes its display mode and
tells you what gates are in that direction instead.

The thing is… you can’t, on first glance, tell that these screens are screens.
They do not have the visual affordance of changing over time. They are not
dimmer than standard static surfaces; they have no flicker. The pixels are not
visible.

So I unconsciously note that there is a sign that tells me where the toilets
are, without memorising the arrow. My cognition is environmental; my extended
mind extends to the sign. I look again, now wanting to know the direction… but
the sign has changed.

I am confused. Was I wrong to look there for direction?

This all happens below my immediate consciousness. I am gaslit by the signage.
By my own mind! By the sign’s appearance, it had informed me that it is not a
changing screen. I must be mistaken.

_My extental reality,_ I absorb just very slightly, just at 0.1% intensity,
_my external reality is not to be trusted._

I am aware that, in bringing up these two examples, I am an old man yelling at
a cloud.

I am gesturing at what appear to be such diffuse effects, homoeopathically
tiny nudges on culture:

It is challenging to belief this even matters?

HOWEVER.

My note from the microcopy-to-culture story is that it is _worth caring about
these things_ because even if I cannot identify the mechanism right now, large
cultural effects from tiny acorns grow.

These examples are, indeed, how culture is enacted and propagated.

So I wonder what the counter-action could be, if I feel so strongly about the
potential effects?

How can I persuade people to remove the meaningless announcements, to return
meaning to signs? Short of enrolling a mob of enraged semioticians to take
matters into their own hands.

To illuminate and persuade, we need new instruments to measure diffuse nudges
on culture.

That sounds abstract. Yet, in the marketing world, something like [Net
promoter score (NPS)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Net_promoter_score)
_(Wikipedia)_ does exactly that.

If you’ve ever been asked whether you would recommend a product or service to
a friend, know that your answer will pass through a standard and simple
algorithm, and be _pored over_ by product managers every 30 days.

The existence of NPS is so potent in bringing about a certain type of
behaviour.

If there were a number to easily measure some abstract social metric -
entrepreneurship, feeling of individual agency, contentment - and then show
how it is eroded by the theatre of announcements that say _“be careful
walking, it’s for your own good”…_

Well,

that would be an awfully technocratic “solution”.

And probably not work, really.

YET:

It doesn’t need to work, really. It doesn’t need to be _true._

I just need _some mechanism._

Some _plausible mechanism_ to get into the heads of policy-makers and
managers.

To make the asinine announcements in train stations _stop._

Because they may or may not be a cause or a symptom of a certain kind of
society, and all of that.

But mainly they drive me loopy.

And I want the robot to stop telling me that it’s raining and therefore I
might slip over because for goodness sake.
