# Press for Poem/1

I’m using this post to track press and media for **Poem/1,** my AI rhyming
clock.

Although there hasn’t been any! Only for the prototype. So I’m listing all of
last year’s press, and then I’ll update this post in the future if required.
(When required! When required!)

In case you missed my latest shilling, I’m manufacturing this ridiculous
clock, Kickstarter gods be willing:

That industrial design update also includes my convoluted theories on _AI
green…_ "Have you noticed that the canonical colour of AI is green?" i.e. the
USB-C cable in the box is green. Folks this is what we call Design.

Oldest first.

**[This clock uses ChatGPT to rhyme / and also help relay the
time](https://www.theverge.com/2023/3/17/23644625/this-clock-uses-chatgpt-to-
rhyme-and-also-help-relay-the-time)**  
_The Verge_ (17 Mar 2023)

Short piece, same day as my [original
tweet](https://x.com/genmon/status/1636698753007603713?s=20).

It’s the creation of Matt Webb, who shared it on Twitter. We love it.

**[This AI clock uses ChatGPT to generate tiny poems that tell the
time](https://www.theverge.com/23669343/ai-clock-chatgpt-poems-rhymes-diy-
project)**  
_The Verge_ (4 Apr 2023)

Long feature with interview.

It uses ChatGPT to create a short two-line rhyme that also tells the time for
every minute of the day. It’s incredible and we want one.

Also a turn of phrase from me:

“Clockwork means you get precision drift; AI-work means you get hallucination
drift.”

**[35 Ways Real People Are Using A.I. Right
Now](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2023/04/14/upshot/up-ai-uses.html)**  
_The New York Times_ (13 Apr 2023)

Prominent mention in longer article.

11\. Build a clock that gives you a new poem every minute.

“Yes, programmatic A.I. is useful,” he said. “But more than that, it’s
enormous fun.”

**[Man claims his AI clock generates a new poem every minute using
ChatGPT](https://www.hindustantimes.com/trending/man-claims-his-ai-clock-
generates-a-new-poem-every-minute-using-chatgpt-101681296561038.html)**  
_Hindustan Times_ (12 Apr 2023)

Delightfully sceptical.

The man took to Twitter to share a post claiming that his AI-powered clock
generates a poem every minute using ChatGPT.

A man’s post about creating an AI-based clock that uses ChatGPT to generate
poems has gone viral. …

**[Man Develops AI Clock That Generates A New Poem Every Minute Using
ChatGPT](https://www.ndtv.com/offbeat/man-develops-ai-clock-that-generates-a-
new-poem-every-minute-using-chatgpt-3950670)**  
_NDTV_ (15 Apr 2023)

Cites _The Verge._

Now, a man has created an AI clock that uses ChatGPT to create tiny poems to
tell time.

**Funny Old World**  
_Private Eye_ (no. 1597, 5 May 2023)

Print only. Reproduces the NDTV story as sent in by a reader. ([I posted it on
Insta](https://www.instagram.com/p/Cr0giGotjJQ/), appearing in the _Eye_ is a
career high.)

SPOTTED a bizarre but true news story from your corner of the globe? … lb20
paid for all entries used.

**[Inside OpenAI, the Architect of ChatGPT, featuring Mira
Murati](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p9Q5a1Vn-Hk)**  
_Bloomberg Originals_ (16 Jun 2023)

Appears in video interview with Mira Murati, OpenAI CTO, in _The Circuit with
Emily Chang_ on YouTube (3m05s).

My clock tweet is the first illustration for this first question:

Chang: Did that surprise you? I mean what you your reaction to the world’s
reaction?

Murati: We were surprised by how much it captured the imaginations of the
general public and how much people just loved spending time talking to this AI
system and interaction with it.

Thanks all!

~~None. Let’s be hopeful. None _yet!_~~

**[This whimsical clock is the playful gadget AI needs right
now](https://www.fastcompany.com/91015583/this-whimsical-clock-is-the-playful-
gadget-ai-needs-right-now)**  
_Fast Company_ (30 Jan 2024)

Great piece by long-time critical friend of the design and technology world
Mark Wilson, a vital role, who has been watching the emerging AI hardware
landscape closer than anyone else I follow. It covers the story and design
decisions behind Poem/1.

The Poem/1 clock dreams up a new poem every minute to tell you the time. Do
you need it? No. But you might want it.

**[013 Matt Webb - Poem/1](https://jwp.news/013-matt-webb-poem-1/)**  
_Journey With Purpose podcast_ (30 Jan 2024)

I had a TON of fun in this pretty irreverent conversation with Randy Plemel…
which also gets into some serious points about design process.

I’m making this gag clock. Which talks in ridiculous poems that sounds like a
tiny, tiny Sam Altman telling me to go for it. And I’m using planetary compute
to do it. And I love the absurdity.

**[Rhyming AI-powered clock sometimes lies about the time, makes up
words](https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2024/01/rhyming-ai-
powered-clock-sometimes-lies-about-the-time-makes-up-words/)**  
_Ars Technica_ (30 Jan 2024)

Zooms in on the charming (but risky) aspect of a clock that may hallucinate
the time. (This is rare now as I answer in the [Kickstarter campaign
FAQ](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/genmon/poem-1-the-ai-poetry-
clock/faqs).)

Poem/1 Kickstarter seeks $103K for fun ChatGPT-fed clock that may hallucinate
the time.

**[It’s Noon You Loon: AI-Powered Clock Tells Time With Poems Written By
ChatGPT](https://www.forbes.com/sites/lesliekatz/2024/02/02/its-noon-you-loon-
ai-powered-clock-tells-time-with-poems-written-by-chatgpt/)**  
_Forbes_ (2 Feb 2024)

Pleasant, informative piece based on an interview so it has some extra detail.

“We have a machine-poet velocity of 0.5 million poems/year,” Webb joked over
email. “There’s a new unit of measurement for you.”

**[Overpromising and Stumbling
Bambis](https://medium.com/@fosta/overpromising-and-stumbling-
bambis-c4139eb43291)**  
_Nick Foster_ (14 Feb 2024)

Foster is former Head of Design at Google X. He says that tech companies
"position their products not only as new ideas but as culturally important
moments, ruptures in the status quo or accelerations of our species."

Instead Poem/1 is

a bit of new thinking escaping in the form of a product.

**Kickstarter Projects We Love**  
_Kickstarter_ (22 Feb 2024)

Given _Projects We Love_ badge with appearances in:

(Poem/1 crossed 100% funded this day.)

**[396 - Matt Webb](https://www.workspaces.xyz/p/396-matt-webb)**  
_Workspaces newsletter_ (24 Feb 2024)

On creativity and cultivating "cultivate high passion, low attachment."

Maybe it’ll work, maybe it won’t. In any long project, you develop emotional
attachment. You want it. Yet at any given moment, it probably won’t happen.
How do you maintain looseness in the face of that want and fear? How do you
keep soft hands and an open ear to possibilities and suggestions?

\*\*[Leverage](https://www.robinsloan.com/newsletters/leverage/)  
_Robin Sloan_ (25 Feb 2024)

Brief, generous mention.

One of the essential characteristics of AI systems seems to be:
inexhaustibility. Now, is that the inexhaustibility of the cornucopia
endlessly overflowing … or the murky rain that never lets up? Both! Neither?
Poem/1 is a playful and provocative foray into this (infinite?) new terrain.

Some more:

I am so grateful for any coverage. Especially when the Kickstarter campaign
launches next week, exact date TBA. It’ll be a marathon I’m sure. I am
available for podcasts, opportunist soundbites, breakfast TV, internal talks
and marriages and garden parties.
