# Briefly on Medusa and why societies collapse

I find Freud’s insistence on individual agency fascinating and refreshing.
See: Medusa turning men to stone.

First, Freud’s interpretation of Medusa’s appearance. "The hair upon Medusa’s
head is frequently represented in works of art in the form of snakes" and this
triggers a _“castration complex”_ as the head with the snakes resembles the
spectator’s mother’s genitals, with its terrifying lack of penis.

This is from the very short essay **Medusa’s Head** (volume XVIII of the
Standard Edition complete works).

And then, putting aside your feelings about this setup, look at where Freud
takes it:

The sight of Medusa’s head makes the spectator stiff with terror, turns him to
stone. … For becoming stiff means an erection. Thus in the original situation
it offers consolation to the spectator: he is still in possession of a penis,
and the stiffening reassures him of the fact.

So Medusa _does not_ turn men to stone.

Instead, the men _choose_ to turn to stone, as comfort from their own terror.

It’s a flip of where cause is located.

_(I say “men” in particular because Freud is consciously or unconsciously
specific on that point, and I’m not deft enough to be able to unravel it.)_

Strangely I’m reminded of [The Collapse of Complex
Societies](https://uk.bookshop.org/books/the-collapse-of-complex-
societies/9780521386739) (1990) by Joseph Tainter ([previously read in
2005](/home/2005/10/26/new_puritans_are_the)).

Tainter’s argument is that, eventually, the cost of increasing complexity hits
declining marginal returns. For every dollar you put into improving society,
it only makes you 50 cents better off. At which point it is not worth the
society, as a problem-solving entity, further investing in ever-more-complex
sociopolitical systems. [Here’s a good summary of the
book.](https://philosophicaldisquisitions.blogspot.com/2019/02/the-collapse-
of-complex-societies_1.html)

In particular, the elites might continue to do better, but society at large
does not.

And therefore:

From the _Summary and Implications:_ "under a situation of declining marginal
returns collapse may be the most appropriate response."

Put another way:

What may be a catastrophe to administrators (and later observers) need not be
to the bulk of the population … It may only be among those members of a
society who have neither the opportunity nor the ability to produce primary
food resources that the collapse of administrative complexities is a clear
disaster. … Collapse then is not intrinsically a collapse. **It is a rational,
economizing process that may well benefit much of the population.**

That’s the same causal flip that Freud does. Collapse isn’t something that
happens _to_ society; it’s something society _chooses to do._

It is always worth asking where cause is located. What appears like an
accident or an imposition or a forceful act may have a more significant
internal component than previously supposed.

Or it may not.

Anyway.

Here are the societies discussed in the introduction to _Collapse._ A litany:

Reading this list gives me the heebie jeebies.
