# The stock market is a machine for creating cults

I’ve been naive about stock ownership. That is, stocks traded on the public
markets like NASDAQ and FTSE.

My _old_ mental model was that holders of stocks were partial owners by virtue
of them owning, well, _shares._ Owners can vote, in theory, on company
decisions. It’s a bit abstract because mostly the mechanism is that you vote
for directors, who are shareholder representatives, a bit like elected
political representatives, and they take company decisions on your behalf. And
then there are passive owners who are simply there for the ride, waiting for
the value of the company to go up and therefore the value of their stock.

Furthermore, the natural value of a share is tied to the future anticipated
value of the corporation.

But my old model ignored the dynamic and social nature of the situation. My
eyes were opened by this line in [Economic Science
Fictions](https://uk.bookshop.org/books/economic-science-
fictions/9781912685073) _([book homepage](https://www.gold.ac.uk/goldsmiths-
press/publications/economic-science-fictions/)):_

**"shareholders in corporations are expected to agree or sell their shares"**
(p44).

Consequences:

A diverse shareholder base does not moderate decisions, in itself. Those who
disagree will simply sell their shares. Voting doesn’t matter.

ALSO: The price of a share will increase (in line with demand) when there is
growth in the number of people in the shareholding population AT LARGE (not
just current owners) who agree with company decisions.

BUT individual shareholders are strongly incentivised to increase their own
wealth.

Which means that, for shareholders to profit via increasing share price, there
is an incentive for those shareholders to encourage others to agree with
company actions.

There is also the reverse incentive: if a shareholder disagrees with company
actions, they would be wise to keep silent until they have sold their shares
(and once they have sold, they have no incentive to say anything at all).

Shareholders turn into evangelists. That’s the function of the market. Profit-
seeking stock holders will spread the word and squash dissent, purely from
self interest.

There is a cult aspect to the publicly traded corporation. That’s my new
mental model.

It’s intrinsic to the way the market works. So the big question about [meme
stocks](https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2021/jan/28/what-is-gamestop-
where-do-the-memes-come-in-and-who-is-winning-or-losing) (being stocks where
the value is determined by online communities piling on) is _not:_ why did
they take off in 2021. But _instead:_ how did it take so long for the
underlying truth to come to the surface? All stocks are meme stocks.

Let me caveat that. I’m not saying that the pricing mechanism for any given
share is _exclusively_ cult-like behaviour.

But another of my long-standing mental models is _perturbation theory._ [Quick
summary:](http://berglondon.com/talks/people/?slide=12) you find a way to
crudely describe the coarse shape of a dynamic system first, then you add on
finer and finer “perturbations” to make your model more accurate. But to a
first approximation you only need the first bit.

Perturbation theory doesn’t always hold – it breaks down in chaotic dynamical
systems (that’s the definition of chaos). But it’s often good enough.

So what I’m saying is that, yes, there are many factors. But, in my new mental
model, it’s the meme stock dynamic that dominates.

The question is: what is to be done about it? I get super uncomfortable about
equities being traded where the value is divorced from the underlying
intrinsic value of the equity, and instead comes from marketplace activity. I
can’t put my finger on _why_ I find it uncomfortable, it just smells of
bullshit and society spinning valuable capacity on churning air.

So my response has two parts:

Dunno.
