# What is the metaverse?

Trends in tech come along every so often, co-opting and organising markets and
sub-technologies around them like iron filings around a magnet. “Metaverse” is
the latest, big enough that Facebook has renamed itself Meta to symbolise its
enlarged focus. So I wanted to organise some of my own thoughts about what it
is.

A trend is a fuzzy-edged phenomenon, a hyperobject touching on: products,
protocols for inter-op, technology stacks, typical business models, and so on.
So any definition is incomplete. The sharp end is the product experience,
which is where adoption happens, and that drives everything else.

So what is the product experience of the metaverse? Loosely I see it as having
three essentials:

I think about immersion on a spectrum. At one end you’ve got VR:

But “immersion” doesn’t have to mean entering cyberspace. You can get _lo-fi
immersion_ if these qualities get across:

And you know what? You don’t need VR for that. Sure it’s _easier_ with 3D
graphics and avatars, but those aren’t essential. You can have persistent
worlds with a strong sense of place (and moving between places!) with text-
based games (MUDs and MOOs, to go way back) – 2D graphics on the web can work
just as well.

Today our apps, docs, webpages and computing environments, by default, are
personal – the P in the PC. It takes work to make them social. In the
metaverse, it’s social by default, and it takes effort to have a non-shared
experience.

This is something different than the social of “social media,” or the comments
and ratings you get with (ugh) UGC, “user generated content.”

To differentiate from the old social of the existing web, the term of art is
_multiplayer._

And that connotes liveness. You need a sense of presence. The ability to
collaborate on shared objects in the shared world, whether for work or fun.
Faces, emotion, video – all of these contribute to a transporting sense that
you are surrounded by other people.

Yes that’s easier with video games and virtual reality. Immersive features
such as place and proximity (and distance) make it possible for crowds to co-
exist.

But again it can be lo-fi. I was previously tracking [how the web is going
multiplayer](/home/2021/09/27/multiplayer) and I recently ran across another
great example: [tldraw](https://www.tldraw.com) is a tiny web-based drawing
app. It’s elegant and playful. You scribble on the page, that’s all.

…then look in the menu. There’s an option named "Create a Multiplayer Room."
Select it. Grab the address from the address bar and share it with a friend.
Now you can see each other’s cursors and you’re drawing on the same canvas. No
bother no fuss. A little glimpse of the metaverse, right there.

So we’ve got a shared, persistent world with shared, persistent objects. And
it’s multiplayer. The last ingredient is economics.

By “economics” I don’t just mean buying objects (perhaps digital assets like
costumes or upgrades) or even virtual land (such as in
[Decentraland](https://decentraland.org), a land-based economy on the
blockchain). What’s important is that these objects are _assets._ You must be
able to sell them; they and their “ownership” must exist in a marketplace that
transcends the platform in which they manifest.

So that implies a concept of identity, money, and rights that exists outside
any given immersive, social platform or another.

Web3 is one obvious stack for this – or at least the collection of
technologies. The stack hasn’t energy yet. By Web3 I mean the crypto
_(cryptocurrency, rather than cryptography)_ world of: identity; payments;
contracts; ownership; currency; and the entire pile of derivatives that can be
created. Yes NFTs are a big part of that. A powerful enabler.

But I don’t see that crypto is intrinsic to having an on-platform economy. It
could happen with the dollar (or fiat currency generally).

So the metaverse is a product experience that is immersive and multiplayer
with built-in economics.

And a metaverse _company_ is a company that provides that or is somehow part
of the stack. Maybe they provide an enabling technology, like easy-to-
integrate presence or treasury, or maybe there’s a yet-to-be-identified
marketing/distribution mechanism that has a particular requirement on
analytics, or maybe they provide an interface like smart glasses. It’s hard to
know at this point what the dynamics will be, or where value will be extracted
in the value chain.

It’s been a while since I’ve read _Snow Crash,_ Neal Stephenson’s 1992 sci-fi
novel in which he invented the concept, so I’ll just grab this from the
Wikipedia page on _Metaverse_ instead:

Neal Stephenson’s metaverse appears to its users as an urban environment
developed along a 100-meter-wide road, called the Street, which spans the
entire 65536 km (216 km) circumference of a featureless, black, perfectly
spherical planet. The virtual real estate is owned by the Global Multimedia
Protocol Group, a fictional part of the real Association for Computing
Machinery, and is available to be bought and buildings developed thereupon.

Users of the metaverse access it through personal terminals that project a
high-quality virtual reality display onto goggles worn by the user, or from
grainy black and white public terminals in booths. The users experience it
from a first-person perspective. …

Within the metaverse, individual users appear as avatars of any form, with the
sole restriction of height, “to prevent people from walking around a mile
high”. Transport within the metaverse is limited to analogs of reality by foot
or vehicle, such as the monorail that runs the entire length of the Street.

So we’ve already got these three qualities: it’s a persistent world, social,
with a built-in economy. It’s dogmatically physical and uses VR, which creates
this sense of immersion, which I guess is why [Meta nee Facebook is working on
haptic gloves](https://www.theverge.com/2021/11/16/22782860/meta-facebook-
reality-labs-soft-robotics-haptic-glove-prototype).

And the economics is kinda ugly. Ruthlessly commercial, and no room for the
open source ethos that was the foundation of Web 2.0, the current generation
of the web.

But the lineage is clear.

The biggest difference, for me, is that Stephenson’s capital-M Metaverse is
singular. There’s one of it. That’s evidently what The Corporation Formerly
Known As Facebook imagines too, and they’ll own it. It’s possible that TCFKAF
is right, and they’ll be the ones that win big.

The web - or rather the application and protocol _WorldWideWeb_ \- was a blip.
I think that’s clear now. It was agnostic to document type, happy to link to
email, gopher, image, and hypertext. It was frivolously free with assets: when
you look at a webpage, the images are downloaded to your computer first and
then assembled into a document! You can even _“view source”_ to see the code
behind a page. Websites are like applications that wear their source code on
the outside.

The web isn’t how systems are typically architected. So we can’t take it for
granted that we’ll end up with a small-m metaverse – a distributed network of
interconnected metaverses, sharing identity and an economy but otherwise
independently immersive. If that’s what we want, we’ll have to work for it.

I think the last major technology trend like this was probably apps and the
smartphone, but actually it’s hard to distinguish that from Web 2.0 that came
just before. And it’s interesting to look back at O’Reilly Media’s catalysing
2005 essay: [What is Web 2.0](https://www.oreilly.com/pub/a/web2/archive/what-
is-web-20.html): "Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next Generation
of Software."

What you’ve got in the “meme map” (on page 1 of the five page essay) is an
approach is totally born of the new open, networked, social, apps-not-docs
web. It’s a set of approaches that _implies_ a set of technologies and
commercial models.

Cited are ideas like:

And in the years since, we’ve seen these formalised into social media,
software as a service (SaaS), tools like git, and ways of working like agile –
all applicable to this fast moving, fast growing world. Cloud platforms
starting with Amazon Web Services and pioneering tech like Ruby on Rails grew
up with Web 2.0. The economics (and economies of scale) of cloud platforms
prescribe a cost model for companies, and that prescribes a revenue model:
subscription for B2B, and the attention economy to B2C.

Web 2.0 even included its own aesthetic, so participants in the trend could
recognise one another versus older, “enemy” approaches like Enterprise. We
still have the warm, bold colours, the chatty brands, the rounded-off corners,
and the cutesy illustrations of 2005.

Web3 is the re-platforming of Web 2.0 to be crypto-native: new identity, new
payments, and new modes of collaboration.

Web3 has its own aesthetic and characteristic visual style. Even its own art
movement with NFTs – [see the new Outland magazine for art criticism in this
domain](https://outland.art). And it has its own shibboleth words to identify
in-group and out-group. _(gm.)_

**But Web3 isn’t a comparable trend.** It’s the metaverse which rivals Web
2.0. The technology stack, the aesthetics, the community, _and the products_
all grow up together. Web3 is part of the puzzle; the metaverse is the whole
shebang.

What happened with Web 2.0 is that it became true but too much.

“Software that gets better the more people use it” is another way of saying
that there aren’t any limits on network effects. _Platform capitalism_ (Nick
Srnicek’s term, mentioned in [my Thingscon talk last
year](/home/2020/12/11/thingscon)) is rapacious. We have one Facebook, not ten
thousand. Whoops.

“Architecture of Participation” led to the sharing economy… which was co-opted
and led to the gig economy, and to so-called “sharing” marketplaces like
Airbnb and Uber mining the under-specified edges of the social contract.

The metaverse also contains as-yet unknown failure modes. It would be worth
puzzling them out now.

We can decompose the question of whether the metaverse trend matters into two
parts:

I will say that the metaverse trend has two qualities in common with two other
large scale trends that I saw up close, or maybe let’s call them movements:
Web 2.0 (described above) and Tech City, London’s transformation into a global
startup hub (I was part of the inception).

Both had multiple constituencies that pushed for the movement for often barely
overlapping reasons. With Web 2.0: corporations, individuals, investors, and
customers up and down the technology stack. In the case of Tech City: Large
corporations and government; founders and real estate owners; lawyers and
journalists. Everyone felt they could immediately get more _for their
particular ship_ by working to rise this particular tide, and they did this
without being instructed what to do.

With the metaverse we have crypto-libertarians tech nerds from Web3 _somehow
aligned_ with platform monopolist VR-maximalists from Facebook. Their values
couldn’t be more opposed yet they are boosters for the same trend.

When a movement creates alignment without coordination, that’s a powerful
force.

_Thanks to Ed Cooke, Thomas O’Duffy, and others
at[Sparkle](https://sparklespace.com) for knowledge and conversations. Blind
spots and misconceptions all my own. As always this is a snapshot: thinking
out loud rather than a final view._
