# Lockdown and discovering new micro-hedonisms

Here’s an intriguing new psychology paper about **appreciating hedonism:**

Relaxing on the sofa or savoring a delicious meal: Enjoying short-term
pleasurable activities that don’t lead to long-term goals contributes at least
as much to a happy life as self-control.

_(Link found over at long-running economics/philosophy blog[Marginal
Revolution](https://marginalrevolution.com).)_

In a nutshell:

Learning this, there’s a wonderful positive feedback effect in that it makes
guilt-free self-indulgent short-term hedonism more allowable, as now I know it
contributes to long-term happiness. _(I hope that knowing about this research
opens some doors for you, too.)_

And also it gets me thinking about my own hedonistic activities…

There’s opera and there’s incredible food at incredible restaurants and
there’s hiking in the desert. When I’m at the ENO and the first few bars of a
Philip Glass starts up, I’m already in tears. But these moments don’t happen
very often.

So there are also the day-to-day **micro-hedonisms.** Picking up a great
coffee, passing a second-hand bookshop and popping in to buy something, going
out for a long run, etc.

a.k.a. self care. My mental model tells me that:

But then… lockdown. I’ve not had access to great coffee or second-hand
bookshops. Lockdown itself and then scheduling has meant I haven’t been
running. I had to find other routines.

Two of my newly discovered/resumed micro-hedonisms:

Can I see myself going back to my old indulgences?

Some yes, others not. As it happens, I did pick up a fancy coffee the other
day and it was… okay I guess? Perhaps I’d already hit my micro-hedonism daily
threshold of diminishing returns.

Two thoughts as a consequence of the above.

First: scale this up. **How much of the economy was dependent on particular
micro-hedonisms of the population,** and now they’ve changed and won’t go
back? “Retail therapy.” Like, maybe retail will be permanently down 5% (and
that time budget distributed over other activities) simply because self care
habits were forced to change and now won’t go back. Who knows. I’m curious.

Second, it has been an _absolute joy_ to read the blogs of my friends over the
last few months and see them pick up new hobbies.

And, reflecting on that unexpected benefit of the last few months, I wonder
how to - in the future - deliberately include some kind of regular micro-
hedonism-discovery spike so that I can escape any local maximum and continue
to find new and delightful self care practices.

Perhaps, once every two years, on 23 March, the anniversary of lockdown
starting in the UK, I’ll start my own 60 day lockdown re-enactment, a carnival
where I fast from all my old daily micro-hedonisms and instead audit whole new
vices - activities I’m terrible at or currently don’t enjoy - sewing, tap-
dancing, writing poetry, watching TV, drinking rum - and at the end of the
festival, keep the best.
