# Rituals for kings, stem cells, and Zoom calls

There’s a need for rituals in science and in everyday software, big rituals
and micro rituals too.

The last time I went out for a beer was 10 March, 2020. The last time I shook
someone’s hand was 11 March – I remember distinctly that it felt awkward, just
before the lockdown officially began, but didn’t know how to else to navigate
the moment.

Shaking hands marks, concretely, the crossing of a significant virtual
threshold: going from being merely in the same physical space as another
human, to being present in the same _social_ space together. Not an atom in
the room has changed and yet… it’s different.

Rob Shields in his book [The Virtual](https://www.routledge.com/The-
Virtual/Shields/p/book/9780415281812) (2003): "The virtual is real but not
actual."

Here’s another example of the virtual:

The historical importance of the virtual may be detected from records of
ritual events and ceremonies; for example, the coronation of kings and queens
bestows a title and ascribes an identity to an actual individual. … The
transformation from, for example, ‘Crown Prince’ to ‘King’ is engineered via
an elaborate ritual in which social attitudes and expectations are shifted and
bodies move ritually from one status to another.

Not an atom in the world has changed, yet someone suddenly has the new right
to chop off your freaking HEAD. That’s what _“the virtual is real”_ means.

But the virtual and the concrete go together, it’s not that one simply
represents the other. Here’s the equation:

**Virtual x Concrete = Actual**

Think of the new US president and the inauguration witnessed by so many of us
on 20 January. If the unsuccessful candidate had thrown a big, concrete
“inauguration event,” would that have granted presidency? No of course not.

But if there were no public inauguration ritual this year, I think we would
all feel that the winning candidate might be _technically_ president, but they
would lack legitimacy.

The canonical example of the virtual is your front door. There is a matter of
centimeters between the public domain and the household one. In the first
domain, we’re talking. In the second, you’re my guest – or a trespasser. So
this threshold of virtual meaning is decorated, in a concrete sense. The front
door doesn’t look like a regular door, although it could. Instead it’s painted
a bright colour, surrounded by a porch, celebrated, and so on.

**Science:**

Jaron Lanier _(futurist and 1980s virtual reality pioneer)_ said this, in
response to a religious critique of the lack of human dignity in stem cell
research:

“Dignity is something people have to create. So I said, ‘You religious people.
Instead of sitting on your duffs and watching us and then critiquing, you
should be the ones figuring out where the dignity comes from for all this. I
challenge you. **I don’t want to be living in a world in 20 years where there
is a non-ritualistic way to do stem-cell research.** … Actively create new
culture.’“

And I think this is a super smart way to square the circle. There are acts,
concrete acts in science that are distasteful. Some are unethical and should
be abandoned. But there are others that I feel would be more acceptable if
treated with the appropriately weighted virtual dignity – the question being,
who do we nominate as the science-clerics to create the rituals?

_ON A SIMILAR NOTE: Veganism is, in my view, on the right side of history –
but personally I enjoy my omnivorous diet, and I imagine there are many like
me, unwilling to let go of our habits. So perhaps a stepping stone movement
could be for us to all start (as previously discussed)[saying thank you to our
meat](/home/2019/06/06/grativore)?_

**Software:**

I want to do what I usually do and drag this back to the mundane.

I’ve been sitting at my computer, more than not, since March last year. What
virtual thresholds are there, and are they accompanied by sufficiently
significant concrete rituals?

Saving a file. OK, it’s fine to press an on-screen button for that.

How about sending money?

I now have less money than I did before and you have more! It’s only bits and
bytes but what’s happened is a big deal. So the physical act is given more
weight: it’s a swipe, or a fingerprint scan. What the designers are doing is
simply matching the virtual with something concrete.

How about finishing a video call?

Someone has left my space. There’s no longer a camera pointing into my house;
there’s no longer a hot mic. Huge! Yet… I tap a square of red pixels to mark
that? Inadequate.

There’s a _wonderful_ tweet with a video clip showing [ex-UK PM Gordon Brown
finishing a video
interview](https://twitter.com/scottygb/status/1304333932779855872). SPOILER,
he simply shuts the laptop, and the last we see is Brown’s keyboard
approaching and then black. The interviewers are speechless. But I get it?
Gordon Brown is performing exactly the correct ritual to end a call.

I feel like software should be designed with microrituals to accompany certain
acts.

The same oblong button can save a document or commit to swinging into action a
factory in China, and that’s the power and also the flatness of computing.
Perhaps part of the weirdness of virtual life and virtual work is this
flatness, an almost imperceptible distance from concrete reality, a vague but
continuous discombobulation, felt below the surface for nine months now.

Maybe when you send an email, you should have to push the button extra hard?
Maybe when I send the final deliverable for a project, I should burn some
battery by lighting a simulated candle?
