# Hyperlocal radio in 1980s Tokyo

In the early 1980s in Japan, a movement called _mini-FM_ blossomed: a thousand
tiny radio stations broadcast over just half a mile each.

One of the first stations was _Radio Home Run,_ broadcast by Tetsuo Kogawa and
his students from 1983–1996 in the Shimokitazawa neighbourhood of Tokyo:

This station took advantage of a loophole in Japanese broadcasting
legislation, which stipulated that devices under a legally-defined power
threshold — usually requiring less than one watt of power — could transmit on
the air without a license. Using a legal very low-powered FM transmitter,
members of Radio Home Run transmitted a signal able to reach listeners within
about 500 meters of the station’s antenna. However, Tokyo’s high population
density meant that this relatively weak transmitter still had massive
possibilities, since its comparatively small coverage area still contained
about “20,000 residents, all potential listeners”.

It was Kogawa’s realisation that low power radio was legal. They had intended
to run a pirate FM station (Tokyo had only two official stations) but he
discovered the exception in the regulations and started investigating cheap,
sometimes hand-made transmitters.

Kogowa wrote books and pamphlets; journalists picked up the story whenever a
new station opened.

He tells the story of mini-FM in [Toward Polymorphous
Radio](http://anarchy.translocal.jp/non-japanese/radiorethink.html):

Even major advertising agencies tried to open mini-FM stations. The exact
number is unknown, but it can be estimated from the number of small
transmitters sold that, in a year, over one thousand stations appeared in
Japan. People on college campuses, in housing complexes, coffee shops and
bars, stalls at street fairs and even local offices started mini-FM stations.
_More than ten companies, including Mitsubishi, Panasonic, Hitachi and Sony,
sold a transmitter labelled “For mini-FM use”._

The intention was to change broadcast: "The area that a one-watt transmitter
covers is within walking or bicycling distance."

And so that early station _Radio Home Run_ became a collective experience:

Radio Home Run transformed listeners into producers by inviting people tuning
in to physically travel to the station’s nearby studio.

[Corollary](<(https://www.researchcatalogue.net/view/462883/462927)>): "it
also revealed how strange typical everyday experiences of radio - through
listening alone - actually are."

I’m skipping over so much!

How Tetsuo Kogawa’s concept of “polymorphous” media anticipated social media.

How physical movement would put the listener in _“kinetic interaction”_ with
the electromagnetic field from the transmitter, moving in and out of coverage.

btw here’s [a great history of mini-FM with its whole context](https://i-n-
g-a.com/products/minifm-free-radio), appended to the shopping page for a hat?
The hat is sold out.

Anyway.

Mini-FM left a legacy. Check this out.

From [a review of the Sony Ericsson W980
Walkman](https://www.gsmarena.com/sony_ericsson_w980-review-250p6.php) – in 2008.

Finally we come to one of the most exotic and intriguing features of Sony
Ericsson W980 - _the FM transmitter allowing you to broadcast your favorite
tracks._ Those can then be picked up by any device with an FM radio receiver
in the vicinity.

By this point the iPhone had been out for a year! The iPod was released in 2001.

Imagine if the iPod had shipped with a built-in FM transmitter and receiver!
Each iPod owner a walking, combined broadcaster and listener.

Except that it wouldn’t have worked.

What we have a word for now is _discovery._ The vital feature of mini-FM was
the potential audience re-tuning between known stations by running up and down
the dial, volume up, stumbling across unheard-of stations.

The vital feature for a two-way iPod would have had to be something similar: a
menu option labelled _Nearby_ next to the albums and the artists.

Yet I can’t let go of that alternate history.

In our parallel universe, we’d all be users of Scott Jenson’s invention of the
[Physical Web](https://google.github.io/physical-web/try-physical-web). It was
built into Android.

The Physical Web enables you to discover web pages associated with everyday
objects and locations. …

When you are near a bluetooth beacon (and have bluetooth enabled), you will
receive a notification for the Physical Web.

Like QR codes only I could carry a beacon in my pocket, get on a train, and
the website would show up on the phone of all the passengers.

Again it’s all down to how you encounter the URL. As a push notification it’s
a spam vector. As a “nearby” tab, more interesting? Possibly. It’s a tough
one.

And related to this:

An iPhone app I am intrigued by is [WorldWideWeb by
IconFactory](https://iconfactory.com/worldwideweb/).

You open a folder on your phone with the app… and it becomes a website
accessible for anyone else on the same wifi network.

Now, what is a shame is that Apple used to list local websites in Safari
bookmarks (the technology is called Bonjour). This feature was removed back in 2017.

So we’ve got a discovery problem again.

Besides, the scale doesn’t match up. The lesson of mini-FM is that you need a
potential audience of 20,000 producer/listeners, not only the people you can
already see.

As someone who made fanzines at school (80 issues sold!!) - that being my
route into the web - I do wonder about the mini-FM equiv for, well, not so
much _new_ media anymore as early-middle-aged media.

But modern broadcast doesn’t afford the fuzzy perimeters of 1980s FM radio.

I’m never going to be bored-browsing Netflix and get a faint glimmer of
someone’s home-broadcast TV show wedged between menu items, there to view if I
can tune in exactly right. My iPhone might be the means of production, in the
right hands, but I’ll never own the means of distribution.

And that’s not a shame, not really, time moves on, our era has its own other
freedoms. But still.
