# Perhaps society needs both me-money and we-money

Let me point to the problem, and then I’ll say why I think we need me-money
and we-money.

The country needs medical professionals like nurses and doctors. Medical
professionals need to live near hospitals, their place of work. They use their
wages to rent or pay a mortgage on houses. This amount is dependant on
property prices.

But the property price is dependent on people with surplus cash, anywhere in
the world, using property as an investment. Property yields returns in the
form of rent and an appreciating price. This investment drives up property
prices.

This seems absurd.

The money that is used to pay health professionals in a shared (socialised)
health system that they use to pay for a place to live SHOULD NOT BE the same
money as the money used by property investors. The two types of money
shouldn’t interact. They should be decoupled.

I get that there are probably good reasons for it, and money probably only
works when it’s universal. I don’t know what the theorists would say, but
let’s focus on the phenomenon here: ultimately this feels like a bug in the
system.

So what’s the answer?

Here is my science fiction:

Could we imagine two separate moneys, individualist money and socialist money.
Call them _me-money_ and _we-money._

_Me-money_ is the money we have now. It works in the exact same way as it does
now. You spend it, you save it, you borrow it, you invest it.

_We-money_ is a second type of money, exchangeable for me-money in limited
ways, and with certain special properties. It’s both more powerful and more
constrained.

We-money is used for socialised health, to tackle climate change, and to build
railways - anything where the main good is felt by society as a whole.

The division works roughly like this:

There are certain things that we want, as a society, that are unlikely to come
about when individuals are left to act in rational self-interest. For example,
corporations will tend to pollute left to their own devices; a corporation
which makes the effort not to pollute will be out-competed by those that don’t
incur that cost. So, as a society, we have regulations which cause the
corporations to act collectively. Often the corporations like regulation like
this, because they then are able to take a desired course of action (not
polluting) which was essentially prohibited by the system when unregulated.

Ditto, we - as a society - want doctors and nurses to be able to afford houses
near hospitals in big cities. But individually, no-one will rationally give up
their place on the housing ladder.

Likewise building railways and other national infrastructure. No private
sector enterprise will rationally take this on (not without being paid a
disproportionate amount to take on the risk), but we all benefit when said
infrastructure is there.

So what I’m proposing is that in systems like paying NHS workers, or investing
in railways, or the government selling carbon credits to polluters, all of
that is done is in a separate currency, we-money, that is insulated from whims
of the main free market economy.

How would it work?

Then we-money has some restrictions:

Supply and demand for we-money will have to be carefully balanced: public
sector workers are paid in we-money, which injects it into the economy, but it
is also the denomination of taxes, and that takes it out.

By insisting that all government taxes and duties, such as carbon credits, are
in we-money, corporations and even individuals will choose to offer discounts
to key workers to get hold of their we-money (and therefore avoid the exchange
tax) or change their ways.

And therefore, medical professions, being paid in we-money, will get a
discount on buying houses.

Two further thoughts:

I can see topics such as

being subject to debate and politics just as much as the level of the personal
tax allowance, or sales tax/VAT, or the minimum wage. And these are
conversations worth having! They allow us to discuss the relative values of
individual and collectivist needs, and I don’t believe we’re able to
adequately pick these apart right now.

Big question: would this work, against the original absurdity I pointed out?

I don’t know. But I decompose the challenge like this:

If you’re an economist, how would you turn the above into an actual paper?
