# An infinite number of monkeys eventually wrote this blog post

So the infinite monkey theorem, right, the idea that if you stick an infinite
number of monkeys in a room with an infinite number of typewriters, they will
eventually write out the complete works of Shakespeare – in 1939 Borges traced
the concept back to Aristotle, and _just now_ I feel like I finally got the
gag.

**The history bit**

Borges goes over the sources in [The Total
Library](https://gwern.net/doc/borges/1939-borges-thetotallibrary.pdf) (1939).
_(This essay sets up his famous short story[The Library of
Babel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Library_of_Babel) (1941) in which
"the books contain every possible ordering of just 25 basic characters.")_

Borges cites Aristotle who introduces the idea of atoms like letters of the
alphabet, followed by Cicero who, in _On the Nature of the Gods,_ anticipates
movable type:

I do not marvel that there should be anyone who can persuade himself that
certain solid and individual bodies are pulled along by the force of gravity,
and that the fortuitous collision of those particles produces this beautiful
world that we see. He who considers this possible will also be able to believe
that _if innumerable characters of gold, each representing one of the twenty-
one letters of the alphabet, were thrown together onto the ground, they might
produce the \_Annals_ of Ennius.\_ I doubt whether chance could possibly create
even a single verse to read.

Borges then leaps forward to Huxley:

Huxley … says that a half-dozen monkeys provided with typewriters would, in a
few eternities, produce all the books in the British Museum.

(Borges footnotes: "Strictly speaking, one immortal monkey would be
sufficient.")

BUT! Borges seems to misstep here.

The quote is attributed to _“Huxley”_ but - which Huxley? - there are many. It
should have (I think?) been Thomas Huxley, early evolutionist, first; others
credit Aldous Huxley (novelist) or Julian Huxley (biologist) – but the monkeys
were hearsay in any event, and [according to this fascinating and tangled
account](https://ncse.ngo/wilder-smith-fantasies-about-huxley), the infinite
monkeys framing originated with either French mathematician Émile Borel (in 1913) or English physicist Arthur Eddington (in 1929).

If infinite monkeys had infinite typewriters, could they retell a metaphor
about infinite monkeys and, etc.

Though I don’t know when the Shakespeare bit appeared.

**The theorem has been tested!**

Twenty years ago:

Lecturers and students from the University of Plymouth wanted to test the
claim that an infinite number of monkeys given typewriters would create the
works of The Bard.

A single computer was placed in a monkey enclosure at Paignton Zoo to monitor
the literary output of six primates.

But after a month, the Sulawesi crested macaques had only succeeded in
partially destroying the machine, using it as a lavatory, and mostly typing
the letter “s”.

I remember this! They had a grant from the Arts Council, mostly for
"purchasing the hardware to set up a radio link so the activities in the
enclosure could be watched live on a website."

More art like this pls.

**The gag is that we know the answer.**

Could infinite monkeys eventually write the complete works of Shakespeare?

Yes, because _we_ are the monkeys, and one of us monkeys was called
Shakespeare, and he did indeed write the complete works, by tautological
definition, and it didn’t take an infinity of monkeys, it took approx 94
billion, that being the [number of humans who had ever lived till
1650](https://www.prb.org/articles/how-many-people-have-ever-lived-on-earth/),
and it didn’t take an eternity but only 190,000 years.

Lol.
