# A proposal for making a Moon city

Here’s a fact about the Moon and space exploration that somebody told me a
couple years back: If it costs $X to get to Earth orbit, it costs $10X to get
to the Moon, and it costs $100X to bring something _back._

One of the games I like to play is “there from here.” For example, I would
love for humanity to have cities in the Asteroid Belt. In this age of [peak
everything](http://reason.com/archives/2010/04/27/peak-everything) I have a
preference to do belt tightening. The solution to not having enough resources
on Earth is to not be constrained to Earth. Let’s go mining in space. Cities
in the Asteroid Belt then – how do we get there from here?

The challenge being that technology develops stepwise. It happens in
increments, and the reach of each increment is dependent on the incentive and
the amount available to be invested. Sometimes a leap is made. So maybe the
incentive is big. The Space Race between the USA and the USSR was one such
incentive. Or the promise of finding a cheap route to the lucrative spices in
the Indies spurred the Europeans to send ships west across the Atlantic. Or
you can keep the investment required low. [Citizen science
projects](http://www.citizensciencealliance.org/projects.html) use the
coordinating technology of the internet to allow many low investments to make
big progress. In order to develop technology towards cities in the Asteroid
Belt, we need to find the steps to get there. We’d have to have cities on the
Moon first. And for that, at the very _least,_ we need to be able to easily
get to and return from the Moon.

But why go to the Moon in the first place? There’s nothing there. And space
technology is so _expensive._ It would be a massive investment to develop
cheaper space technology. No incentive.

Okay, so here’s a thing. Technology evolves from where we are now. What are
some things we’re getting great at right now? Robot factories. Mining. Thank
you
[Foxconn.](http://news.xinhuanet.com/english2010/china/2011-07/30/c_131018764.htm)
Thank you rapacious appetite of the consumer society for hard to find rare
earth minerals.

And to review: It’s much cheaper to get to the Moon than to come back, so make
it a one-way journey. And it’s peak everything, so the value of mineral
resources is only going to go up.

Two other thoughts: the [X Prize](http://www.xprize.org/) ("Revolution through
Competition"), and USA [Homestead Act of
1862,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homestead_Act) whereby a system to grant
land rights to individuals was set up, by which a person living on and
improving the land was granted property.

Here’s my proposal:

We build robot mining factories and send them to the Moon.

Once there, they extract and purify valuable resources, packaging it in an
automated fashion to be picked up. Time passes. The piles of nicely packaged
and purified minerals grow and grow on the lunar surface. Meanwhile commodity
prices on Earth also rise. The piles steadily grow in value. And grow, and
grow. A prize that increases in value the longer you wait. CEOs of
manufacturing companies look lustfully through their telescopes. The CEOs eye
one-another suspiciously.

Until suddenly it becomes worthwhile to develop technology to get to the Moon
and bring it all back. Whoever gets to the pile first is allowed to keep it.
There is a race! Mining companies make the leap to the next generation of
space technology.

And as a spin-off we have a sustainable Moon-Earth shuttle service. Stick a
few people on the shuttle, establish a permanent settlement, ta da, Moon city.
Next step Ceres.
