# More on conversational UIs

ICYMI, last week I dropped a ton of links + speculation on text messaging as
user interface… [Read it
here.](http://interconnected.org/home/2015/06/16/conversational_uis)
Alternatively catch up with:

I wanted to add a few more links.

[Lark](http://www.web.lark.com) is a weight-loss coach that communicates with
you exclusively through messaging.

[Hello Lamp Post](http://panstudio.co.uk/folio/hello-lamp-post/) (detailed
project page) is "a playful SMS platform, inviting people to strike up
conversations with familiar street furniture using the text message function
of their mobile phones." Including escalating intimacy:

To help players feel as though their relationship with objects could develop,
we built in a friendship mechanic - initial conversations would be a bit
small-talky, about the weather and observations on the local environment, but
on repeat visits the questioning of the objects would change, to focus on
opinions, memories and beliefs.

_(Unique qualities of text-based conversational UI… user-initiated
conversations and app-initiation conversations feel the same, unlike regular
apps; the element of time allows pauses and rhythms, like free-to-play games;
it’s how we already talk with our friends.)_

Designing for text-based interfaces is going to take some experimentation.

[What is conversation?](http://www.dubberly.com/articles/what-is-
conversation.html) is some decent theory… might be useful as a framework to
talk about how conversations are structured and what’s they’re for.
_(Thanks[@matt_thinkux](https://twitter.com/matt_thinkux).)_

[The word “just” creates a parent/child
relationship.](http://www.businessinsider.com/former-google-exec-says-this-
word-can-damage-your-credibility-2015-6?IR=T) The article is in the context of
women in the workplace, but this is an important point about language: Should
a bot display deference? What should its stance be?

I’m definitely more into how all of this _feels_ – Alexis Lloyd (at the New
York Times Research & Development group) wrote up her experiments: [Our
friends, the bots?](http://blog.nytlabs.com/2015/06/17/our-friends-the-bots/)
"I was curious to see what it would feel like to have a bot that was trying to
engage as part of a social group"

I haven’t yet found the right words to characterize what this bot relationship
feels like. It’s non-threatening, but doesn’t quite feel like a child or a
pet. Yet it’s clearly not a peer either. A charming alien, perhaps? The
notable aspect is that it doesn’t seem anthropomorphic or zoomorphic. It is
very much a different kind of otherness, but one that has subjectivity and
with which we can establish a relationship.

And:

The conversation about how to define the bot’s relationship to us really
elucidated the idea that we are moving toward one member called “non-human
mental models”. We are beginning to understand machine subjectivity in a way
that is in keeping with its nature rather than forcing it into other
constructs, like a person or an animal.

This I _love._

It’s not just bots. How do we speak with non-humans, on their own terms? What
does a bot _want?_ Or a penguin, or a rock, or the military-industrial
complex. Do we need human translators who can hold empathy for them on our
behalf? Do we need a speaker for the thermocline? See also: [The Author of the
Acacia Seeds,](http://interconnected.org/home/more/2007/03/acacia-seeds.html)
Ursula K. Le Guin.

There’s a hashtag used by speakers for the bots: #botALLY.

[What?](https://twitter.com/swayandsea/status/605076817582522368)

we are kind and gentle botmakers, allies to bots of all kinds and creeds

Found via that tag, a tool to help make Twitterbots: [Cheap Bots, Done
Quick!](http://cheapbotsdonequick.com)

e.g. [@infinitedeserts](https://twitter.com/infinitedeserts), "an infinity of
deserts, each more infinite than the last."

(I’m no stranger to twitter bots, I [made a presence
machine](http://interconnected.org/home/2008/01/06/the_presence_machine) and
[retold 99
Secrets](http://interconnected.org/home/2009/02/18/carl_steadman_opened) –
both now silent.)

[More on writing twitter bots, without
code.](http://blog.tullyhansen.com/post/62774813528/fake-it-til-you-make-it-a-
basic-bot-primer-for) [More on writing twitter bots, with
code.](http://tinysubversions.com/2013/09/how-to-make-a-twitter-bot/)

Lastly:

[Telegram Bot Platform.](https://telegram.org/blog/bot-revolution) (Telegram
is a messaging app with 60+ million monthly active users; it’s growing fast.)

Bots are simply Telegram accounts operated by software - not people - and
they’ll often have AI features. They can do anything - teach, play, search,
broadcast, remind, connect, integrate with other services, or even pass
commands to the Internet of Things.

Neat about Telegram’s approach, #1: "Bots can now provide you with custom
keyboards for specialized tasks" (examples are shown). Any good bot platform
is going to have to do this, typing is too cumbersome otherwise.

Neat about Telegram’s approach, #2: "any message from your bot forwarded to a
person or group is a messaging equivalent of a retweet - bots are viral."

The really unique feature about conversational UIs is that messaging is
social. Introductions can be made. Bots can take part in group conversations;
facts can be remembered and shared. There’s [a figure and a
ground.](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Figure-ground_(perception)>)

Enough!
