# We already have mirror pixels and camera pixels

I posted [complaining about screen technology](/home/2020/08/11/screens) the
other day, and Benedict Evans linked to it in his truly excellent
[newsletter](https://www.ben-evans.com/newsletter) which goes out to 150,000
people, so some of you will be here because of that. **Sorry!** Mostly I post
about things like [whether virtual conferences could be a month
long](/home/2020/05/24/a_month_long_conference), or [can human being detect
north](/home/2020/07/14/north_sense). I guess the moral is I should complain
about things more.

ANYWAY. It turns out there are some interesting technologies bubbling under
with screens:

**Mirror pixels!** I was demanding that we have reflectivity in screens. This
seemed absurd, BUT:

Every office projector for 20 years uses [Digital Light
Processing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_Light_Processing): the
projected image is created by "microscopically small mirrors laid out in a
matrix on a semiconductor chip" – each mirror corresponds to one pixel in the
projection. The mirrors can be flipped on or off. Bright light is bounced off
the mirror surface.

_Thanks to Daniel Matos a.k.a.[@dmatos](https://twitter.com/dmatos) for
telling me about this._

So, could these mirror pixels be blended with existing screens? Well, in an
adjacent technology…

**Camera pixels!**

Here’s Apple’s 2004 patent for an [integrated sensing
display](https://appleinsider.com/articles/08/03/26/apples_patent_for_an_lcd_display_that_also_takes_photos_video.html):
the idea is "to wedge thousands of microscopic image sensors between the LCD
cells that make up the display" and stitch it all together with computational
photography.

I like this:

One use and benefit for such a panel is video conferencing: a user can
maintain eye contact with someone on screen because the camera is ‘in’ the
screen.

Can you even imagine? What about a screen where you scan a document by holding
it up to the LCD?

_What about a phone that lets you take selfies by turning into a MIRROR, and
it captures a 3D image because the effective size of the camera sensor is the
ENTIRE SCREEN._

The point is that we don’t need to stop at red, green, and blue subpixels.
Other pixel types can be integrated.

**Transparent screens!**

Then of course there are [transparent
OLEDs](https://oled.com/oleds/transparent-oleds-toleds/).

AND SO

I was kinda okay when I was just imagining stuff like this. But after learning
that these technologies _exist_ already, I find myself even more frustrated
that we don’t have them in our pockets.

Apple drives the direction of smartphones. That won’t always be the case, but
it has been so far.

Apple is legendarily focused on _product marketing_. Every product and
hardware innovation - and they are often _mighty_ innovations - is driven by a
marketable vision.

But part of me feels like sometimes functionality should be added without that
vision.

Perhaps product marketing has trimmed away the fascinating loose threads of
computing, leaving the hackers and the artists - those who expand our range of
the possible - nothing to play with.
