# Post at 22.50, on Sunday 20 Jan 2008

Movement. I'll be speaking at [Web Directions
North](http://north08.webdirections.org/ "The closing keynote.") at the end of
the month, and taking the opportunity to expand on some of [notes in last
year's wrap-up](/home/2007/12/28/wrapping_up_2007 "In particular sections
#9-13.").

Today I met up with [Tom Armitage](http://infovore.org/ "Infovore. Thinker and
Web maker.") to see what he's created for a prototype we've been working on
together. It shows off a simple pattern I think should (and will be) part of
every web app. But before Tom made the proof of concept, I didn't know if it'd
work. It does, it's better than I imagined, and I'm totally psyched. There'll
be a demo in my talk.

The abstract, for **Movement** :

We've always had metaphors to understand and design for the Web.

The original conception of the Web was as a library of documents. Our building
blocks were derived from spatial ideas: "breadcrumbs," "visits" and
"homepages" were used to understand the medium.

Website-as-application was a new and novel metaphor in the late 1990s. The
spatial concept of navigation was replaced by concepts derived from tools:
buttons performed actions on data.

These metaphors inspire separate but complementary models of the Web. But the
Web in 2008 has some entirely new qualities: more than ever it's an ecology of
separate but highly interconnected services. Its fiercely competitive, rapid
development means differentiating innovations are quickly copied and spread.
Attention from users is scarce. The fittest websites survive. In this world,
what metaphors can be most successfully wielded?

Matt takes as a starting point interaction and product design, with ideas from
cybernetics and Getting Things Done. He offers as a metaphor the concept of
the Web as experience. That is, treating a website as a dynamic entity - a
flowchart of motivations that both provides a continuously satisfying
experience for the user... and helps the website grow.

From seeing what kind of websites this model provokes, we'll see whether it
also helps illuminate some of the Web's coming design challenges: the blending
of the Web with desktop software and physical devices; the particular concerns
of small groups; and what the next movement might bring.
