# How about twice yearly MRIs for a personal Check Engine light

I have a hunch about MRI that comes from seeing a company that an old uni
friend has built around liver disease.

The original insight of my friend, who is a doctor, is to do with a particular
liver condition which is (or was) diagnosed with a biopsy. Obviously that’s a
medical procedure. It’s invasive. He discovered that the biopsy could be
substituted with an MRI scan plus new techniques in computer vision.

And I wonder how many medical diagnoses are tractable to that same approach?

Add to this three points:

Put all of this together:

Could our future include pro-active regular screening for all kinds of
conditions?

Imagine you get a full-body MRI every 6 months. Nothing wrong necessarily,
it’s just like going to the dental hygienist. Then 100s of different machine
learning models run, one looking for a particular liver condition, one looking
at another organ, another looking for such-and-such anomaly elsewhere, etc.
It’s purely precautionary; a way to pick up issues before they get serious; a
Check Engine light for your body. You’d get a notification on your phone the
next morning.

An app ecosystem around regular, precautionary MRI:

It’s unlikely that the company which is good at MRI machine manufacture is the
same as the company which is good at customer relationship and operations, and
it’s unlikely that either of those will have the software focus to train
machine learning models to identify specific conditions (each condition
probably being the topic of a whole stack of doctoral theses).

So I see something that is more like a software ecosystem. As a consumer, you
pay (or your insurance pays) for the twice yearly scan. A portion of that fee
gets divided amongst the hundreds of separate companies that provide computer
vision modules that run across your full-body image, like paying for Spotify
streams.

OR BETTER, to complete the feedback loop, each company might run their
software on the image at their own cost, and they receive a success fee for
each condition that they identify which is also successfully confirmed. (With
some kind of adjustment to incentivise a low number of false negatives too.)

The role of the operations company is to orchestrate the ecosystem and
economics, also managing the distribution to the computer vision app
developers of training data (source imagery and eventual known outcomes from
existing biopsy techniques and medical records).

One analogy is the company [Planet](https://www.planet.com) which uses 200
satellites to take daily, high resolution images of the surface of the entire
globe. Some of the satellites are to 50cm resolution.

Think of what you can do with high frequency global photography: look at
infra-red signatures to figure out, to the day, when your crops are ready for
harvest; monitor container ship positions to predict future pricing; see where
to target your roof insulation sales effort; check for broken street lamps
against a “known good” list; or whatever.

Sure you could achieve these by installing sensors, or using drones, or even
walking the streets… but why bother? The satellite imagery has already been
collected. The rest is software that runs on a schedule in the cloud.

Computers don’t get bored. Software is perfect for trivial or speculative
repetitive tasks. It’s pixels and algorithms and compute cycles, that’s all.

I wonder what it would take to develop the technology (and establish the
market, private or public) for this kind of MRI-based _early warning system_
for personal healthcare. I can’t imagine that existing MRI tech would be a
good fit for regular full-body – but maybe, one day, given the right
incentives?

From a policy perspective: what kind of white paper would you have to write
such that politicians would choose to fund this as industry-sector-creating
R&D?

Anyway it feels kind of inevitable, though I’m not sure how we get there.
