# The emerging patchwork upgrade to the multiplayer web

One of the tech things I’m tracking is how the web is slowly going
multiplayer.

Though in a specific patchwork way… Yes there are full web apps that are
multiplayer, like Google Docs where you have collaborative editing and
everyone sees everyone else selecting and editing text, or Figma which is
design software with co-presence, so each document has a flurry of mouse
cursors chasing round the canvas. And I think I’ll include in this list of
apps the wonderful [Sprout](https://sprout.place): a persistent space for
small group video chats which you can decorate and arrange as you like
(previously named _MakeSpace,_ [discussed in July
2020](/home/2020/07/23/spatial_interfaces) in the context of social, spatial
interfaces).

All brilliant.

But I am more interested, at this point, in the elemental building blocks of
the web, and how these Lego bricks might become multiplayer and be used to
upgrade the web bit by bit.

FOR EXAMPLE (these are both developer-facing projects):

**If you know of more projects like this, please let me know!**

What’s interesting here is that these don’t demand re-platforming of entire
websites. They are piecemeal, backwards-compatible upgrades that change out
single blocks of _existing_ websites and, in doing so, bring them to life.

They focus on creating a social user interface, which I like, but there’s a
lot that remains unsolved. Like: how do we know who a user is and where do the
avatars come from – is there a role for an identity provider? How can a user
choose who to show and who to hide – is there a role for a trust provider?
Where is the data stored, and is it shared across sites, and who owns it? All
of that.

_(And, intriguingly, these unsolved technical layers are addressed by the Web3
world, an emerging technology stack which is inherently distributed and
includes personal ownership of identity, data, assets, payments and so on.)_

What’s common, in what I’m seeing, is that there is a nuanced approach to the
social experience.

There is presence (the sensation of togetherness, which creates a sense of
_“place”_). There is fine-grained, real-time editing, which means that
collaboration can occur. And there is persistence of data, so it’s possible to
build or accrete over time. So there’s a kind of gradient of social
interaction which is being filled out.

Are the organisations looking after the web as a platform looking at this? I’m
thinking of W3C and also Google Chrome and Mozilla. There’s an opportunity to
catalyse this movement by knitting together existing standards projects.

The hard tech that originally powered collaboration tools like Google Docs is
now available to all developers as JavaScript libraries, and in addition to
seeing it power parallel apps (like Figma), it might be interesting to think
about bootstrapping the whole ecosystem to the next level: a newly social,
distributed, real-time multiplayer web.
