# Filtered for musical cyborgs

Here’s [Piano Genie](https://magenta.tensorflow.org/pianogenie), a device with
a row of eight colourful arcade buttons that sits between the player and the
actual piano keyboard.

Play the coloured buttons, and the device improvises a virtuoso performance on
the piano itself – matching the intent of your ham-fisted button pushing.

Musical upscaling, I guess?

File this cyborg prosthesis as: **power amplifier.** It directly amplifies
human intent.

[Guitar Machine](https://www.media.mit.edu/posts/guitar-machine/) is a robotic
attachment for a guitar.

At first it seems like Guitar Machine is a replacement for the human: the
player will “train” the machine (programming by example?) and the machine will
replay what it has been taught.

So file this cyborg prosthesis as: **macro engine.** Script once, repeat
indefinitely.

BUT – give a machine like this to a musician, and they try to break it. Guitar
Machine can play the guitar _simultaneously_ with the human:

He was seamlessly transitioning between giving the robot the lead, taking over
control, and synthesizing his own playing with the robot’s once he understood
what the robot was doing.

A duet!

Here’s a short documentary about [a drummer with a bionic
arm](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4TMvcsGZoqM). He lost his original arm,
and now in its place is this bionic arm that is made to play the drums.

Another article goes hard on [how the beats aren’t humanly
possible](https://scroll.in/video/876239/watch-this-bionic-drummer-can-play-
beats-that-arent-humanly-possible-thanks-to-a-cyborg-arm): "The prosthetic arm
can play the drums four times faster than humans."

The arm "can also play strange polyrhythms that no human can play."

Then there’s this bit:

Then, he fitted Barnes with a cyborg arm with two drumsticks – one that is
controlled by Barnes, and the other that operates autonomously through its own
actuator. **The arm actually listens to the music being played and improvises
its own accompanying beat pattern,** which are pre-programmed into it.

I am into the idea that this cyborg arm has its own will and its own creative
urge.

The two-way feedback and improvisation makes this more than a duet.

File this cyborg prosthesis as a third type:
[centaur](https://magicalnihilism.com/2016/03/31/centaurs-not-butlers/).

I posted last month about [wild cyborg
prosthetics](/home/2020/04/07/cyborg_prosthetics) – it strikes me that a
typology like this is a useful way to generate more ideas.

HEY, A QUESTION:

Are there research labs in the UK/Europe working on the underlying tech for
this? In any domain really, music to military, swimming to shopping. Like,
human prostheses haunted by embedded wilful compute?

_As they say, lmk._

[The Impossible Music of Black
MIDI](https://rhizome.org/editorial/2013/sep/23/impossible-music-black-midi/)
starts with some historical background:

In 1947, the composer Conlon Nancarrow–frustrated with human pianists and
their limited ability to play his rhythmically complex music–purchased a
device which allowed him to punch holes in player piano rolls. This technology
allowed him to create incredibly complex musical compositions, unplayable by
human hands, **which later came to be widely recognized by electronic
musicians as an important precursor** to their work.

And this is the whole point. Cyborg technology is not about existing musicians
playing existing music with less effort. It’s about scouting ahead to invent
_whole new genres._

The article goes on to talk about _Black MIDI_ itself:

A similar interest in seemingly impossible music can be found today in a group
of musicians who use MIDI files (which store musical notes and timings, not
unlike player piano rolls) to create compositions that feature staggering
numbers of notes. They’re calling this kind of music “black MIDI,” which
basically means that **when you look at the music in the form of standard
notation, it looks like almost solid black.**

The sound is an ascent into an insane chaos, like jamming static in your ears.
I love it.

Do check out the article because then you can listen to the track **Bad
Apple,** which is embedded there, and which "reportedly includes 8.49 million
separate notes."

Not that we measure the worth of music by weight, like buying potatoes. But
still, what if we did.
