# Mwie Ltd

About three weeks back, fellow traveller Tom Critchlow shared his annual notes
on being an independent consultant: [5 years on the road: Thoughts on
sustainable independence](https://tomcritchlow.com/2019/10/24/5-years/).

And: coincidence! I work via a consultancy vehicle called **Mwie Ltd.** I am
its sole employee. Mwie was incorporated in October 2014 and issued its first
invoice in November 2014, so that _also_ puts me 5 years on the job. Happy
work anniversary, I guess (which is absolutely not a thing although LinkedIn
insists it is).

Inspired by Tom, I started writing a blog post retrospective. What I’ve been
doing, what some highlights have been, etc.

What I’d like to do more of.

What’s missing.

What am I any good at.

Oh my god where is it all going anyway.

Ok so (a) I shouldn’t have tried to write to write a retrospective on my own
on a Friday night; and (b) wow it got way too personal, there’s no way I’m
sharing it.

The thing is that for the past five years, I _haven’t_ been talking about what
I’m up to, and there _hasn’t_ been a plan. My strategy has been

That last point all about what we’d call in other contexts product-market fit.
That hyphen is an arrow of influence that points both ways.

Marketing requires a view on what the market finds valuable; what will
resonate. In my case, how clients will find and understand business value. Not
only have I lacked up-to-date knowledge of what value I, personally, can
unlock, but prematurely working on marketing will shape the product before
it’s ready.

And what is the “product” here? Well it’s me, my practice — it’s some overlap
of what I find stimulating, what I’m good at, and what helps me get future
work which is the same but better. But can I _articulate_ that? Not a chance.

So if I look at the last five years, the strategy has been

If it sounds like I’m starting from the ground floor here, I guess it’s
because I am. BERG (the design consultancy turned tech startup I co-founded)
shut its doors in 2014, and I carried on working on various loose ends well
into 2015. My “voice”, needs, patter, platform, and intellectual interests had
been mixed with the studio, in one incarnation or another, for 10 years. It’s…
confusing. Moreover, I had been surrounded by some of the most talented,
unique individuals I have ever met — and one of the jobs of a CEO is to do
only what can’t be done by others.

All of which means I came into my current five year stint as “Independent
Consultant” (according to my LinkedIn) with very little real idea of what I
was good at and what I wanted out of my work. And, if I’m honest, a bit afraid
that the expectations of others — potential clients — would shape my practice
into what _they_ needed and thought I could offer, before I could figure that
out for myself.

Let’s call it product discovery and market discovery. Business-speak as
camouflage for feelings.

I wish I could find the source of this quote. I remember reading Kevin Kelly
relating something he heard from his mentor Stewart Brand:

We have time for three 15 year careers. In each career, you’ve got five years
to learn and work your way into it. Then five years to do it as well as you
can. Finally you have five years where you can offer a new spin from your own
individual perspective.

I think about this period I’m in as my second career. I’ve been in no hurry to
figure out what it is.

But… five years in. Maybe it’s time to finish the discovery chapter and focus
on execution for a bit.

Where were we? Oh yes, Friday night a little over two weeks back. On my own at
the kitchen table with my laptop and a class of red, writing a career
retrospective that was rapidly devolving into a career existential crisis.

Here’s what I did.

Before I go into the results of that personal career review, it’s worth saying
why I separate myself from my consultancy, Mwie Ltd, even though the two are
often the same.

You get what you do. Or rather, you get what others see that you do.

It’s funny. Jack and I gave an interview to the Daily Telegraph business
section (I’m not even kidding) way back in 2007. I just went back and read it,
and the advice in that article is exactly what I had to remind myself about
that Friday night. [Here’s the
article:](https://web.archive.org/web/20071105181112/http://www.telegraph.co.uk/money/main.jhtml?xml=/money/2007/05/15/cbstart15.xml)

“We started turning down work,” says Webb, describing the duo’s slightly
different approach to building a fledgling business. But Schulze and Webb had
an unusual problem - when they spoke to potential customers they would get
offers to design websites or graphic material. But that wasn’t what they meant
by “design”. “Bits of plastic and microcontrollers,” says Webb, “the future
world of products.” These were the things that excited them.

Friends advised two strategies. One: find a way to communicate to people what
you do in language they can use with others (such as their bosses). Two: make
things that encapsulate the kind of work you want to do and hope people
discover them.

And at the end of the article:

**Do:** Start with the smallest thing that’ll work. The learning you get from
‘doing’ is huge, it gives you pace, and big plans are always bigger than they
look from the outside.

**Don’t:** Take work only for the money. You get what you do, so work that
makes you unhappy is not progressive. And it’s better to structure the
business so you don’t need the cash than take work that kills the opportunity
of much better work.

Bloody hell. Thank you very much _Jack-and-me-from-2007._

My personal career review includes some course-correction points.

I’m not going to share details on the above points if that’s ok.

Mainly, and this is what surprised me, when I looked back over five years of
projects

None of this was necessarily going to be the case. So, good news.

You get what you do.

Long story short, I redesigned my website. Between other things that took two
weeks and I put it live yesterday.

I thought about renaming. But switching away from Mwie Ltd felt like it would
be inauthentic — it _is_ just me, after all, operating as a limited company,
and I have no intention of building it into another agency. Been there, done
that.

Secret origin: “Mwie” stands for _Matt Webb Import/Export_ because when I was
a kid, visiting family in Nairobi, we would pass all kinds of import/export
businesses and I still remember them as exotic and mysterious. I always wanted
one of my own. And so.

Yet Mwie is a dumb name. So in the spirit of celebrating that which binds us,
I figured I would lean in and put the expanded version on the homepage too.

Actually writing the case studies was pretty simple. This isn’t a launch of a
new offer. There’s nothing aspirational here, and no new positioning. All I’m
doing — very incrementally — is reinforcing existing word of mouth marketing
by stating exactly what I already say in person.

So I just wrote down how I already talk about my projects.

Putting them in one place, and grouping them: that’s new.

Oh, and the design. I get my hands dirty with web design every year or two.
It’s fun, although of course now I can’t see anything except what I think is
wrong with it.

[Here’s a screen grab of the old mwie.com
website](http://interconnected.org/home/more/2019/11/mwie_com.png) from
November 2019. Single page. Useful mainly for the boilerplate which shows the
company registration number.

Here’s the new one:

**[Mwie Ltd: Matt Webb Import/Export, est. 2014.](http://www.mwie.com)**

As always, I’m up for hearing your thoughts. There’s a contact page on the
other side of that hyperlink should you wish to get in touch.
