# Post at 22.32, on Friday 4 Jan 2008

[My Muesli](http://www.mymuesli.com/ "Like that genetic algorithms drink thing
I was talking about. Customisation!") [[via](http://del.icio.us/megp "Thanks
Meg.")]: custom-mixed cereal. See also, [Coco Pops
Creations](http://schulzeandwebb.com/2007/stack/slides/?p=7 "Where I also make
a distinction between customisation and personalisation.").

[SnuzNLuz](http://www.thinkgeek.com/stuff/41/snuznluz.shtml "'Wake up to the
smell of...Animosity...'") [[via](http://kottke.org/)]: an alarm clock that
donates money to a charity with which you ideologically disagree whenever you
hit the snooze button.

[765 traces a tale of trees and
branching](http://765.blogspot.com/2007/12/branching_30.html "Back to trees
and l-systems."), with stepping stones of celtic art, fractals and
territories. The [ultimate
composition](http://www.flickr.com/photos/harleycat/2149794375/ "Branching.")
is breathtaking in [how](http://www.levitated.net/p5/chamber/ "Bubble
chambers.") [many](http://snibbe.com/scott/dynamic/bubble_harp.html "Bubble
harps.") [systems](http://www.flight404.com/blog/?p=40 "Don't forget to watch
the video.") [[thanks](http://www.tom-carden.co.uk/ "In Ben's car, in San
Francisco, we looked up and saw this, and Tom told me about this art. Months
later, he still remembers and finds it for me again. Thank you!")] it
resembles.

Following on, there's a link to Rod's piece, [Abbey Among Oak Trees (Northern
Line), 2006](http://rodcorp.typepad.com/rodcorp/2006/08/abbey_among_oak.html "Images and background."), a composite image using, in the place of
brushstrokes, long random drawings created on tube trains. The brushstrokes
tangle together and tug at one another in a way that it's easy to forget
elements always do in any composition (image or text, or code for that
matter). Where that tangling is usually a property of something aside what the
medium is really about (as colour and texture is for paint, meaning and poetry
is for words), Rod's brushstrokes have that as their core and almost only
nature.
