# New rooms for the new normal

In the new normal, I imagine we’ll need a few new room types for our homes.

**1\. Quarantine room**

Now when we get grocery deliveries, Amazon parcels, or hand-me-down toddler
clothes from friends, we take them directly from the front door to a holding
zone where they sit for 24 hours before being allowed into the house proper.
(Covid-19 does [linger on surfaces for longer than
that](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/17/health/coronavirus-surfaces-
aerosols.html) but the concentrations drop quickly.) The holding zone is the
corner of a bathroom. Cold items go on a special isolation shelf in the
fridge.

Maybe we could build a porch onto the front of our house and create a
quarantine room. Bonus points: if we could give one-time access codes so
deliveries can be left somewhere safe indoors, but without having grant full
access.

**2\. Video conference room**

You have to care about different things when you’re working from home.
Backdrops are important, as is lighting. I take my video calls with a neutral
grey wall behind me. And while I was considering bookshelves for that wall
before, now I want to keep it clear.

Doing the [PE with Joe live
workouts](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCAxW1XT0iEJo0TYlRfn6rYQ) at 9am
every day, I’m struck by how considered his backdrop is – it’s definitely his
home with his personality, but it uses neutral colours and all the ornaments
are non-overlapping and mostly low contrast. It probably compresses well.
[Here’s a pic.](https://www.instagram.com/p/B-P8CO8Dcp7/)

It’s easier to maintain a space like that at home if it’s just _one_ space.
Everywhere else can be a mess. And so long as I’m always going to use that
single space, then why not attach a proper webcam to the wall opposite, add
some soft furnishings to dampen echos, etc.

There’s probably a good business in being an interior designer who curates
Zoom-friendly home office backgrounds. Though in this age of lockdown you’d
have to figure out how to do it without actually visiting the house. Maybe in
the interim Ikea could supply pop-up video call snugs with well-positioned
lamps and tasteful decor.

Also I wonder how this will impact fashion? I noticed I was looking like a
mountain man so I shaved my hair off. But I haven’t worn a nice pair of shoes
for weeks and I’m mostly in sweatpants. Zoom life is all haircuts and no
trousers.

**3\. A home that pays its way**

Ok, Airbnb is getting a shoeing because it turns out that _(as everybody
knew…)_ people were hoarding property and farming them with short lets,
damaging neighbourhoods and driving up rent. BUT the original idea makes
sense: rent out a room in my home, or the whole place when I’m not there. The
sharing economy innit.

And the _wider_ picture is that your home needs to work for its living. In
unstable economic times, a home should also be a source of income, so what
does that mean? A room with its own entrance, and a second door (lockable from
both sides) that goes into the kitchen for breakfast, to be rented out? Solar
on the roof, obviously, sold back to the grid. A kitchen garden. A
[Powerwall](https://www.tesla.com/en_GB/powerwall) home battery to store cheap
electricity and then sell it to neighbours?

Maybe the future of the “front room” is to be a mixed public/private space, a
bit like the shopfronts or workshops of old – a space which is made to run a
small artisan business: massage, haircuts, I.T. support, neighbourhood parcel
drop-off… a counter, a big welcoming window to the street, a secure internal
door to the rest of the house. How would architecture respond if the ground
floor of a duplex, or the front half of a home was assumed to be semi-
permeable interface to the outside world like this?
