# Post at 10.06, on Wednesday 9 Jan 2008

**New software pricing models** are always worth looking out for. More and
more cleanly defined _things_ are sliding towards plain ol' data (not just
media. Home fabbing and local, short run manufacture are turning [home
electricals](http://wiki.opendildonics.org/Main_Page "Open source
teledildonics.") and [clothes](http://www.burdastyle.com/ "BurdaStyle,
Instructables.com for fashion.") into free data plus effort). And because the
concept of commercial software is so new (only since [Bill Gates invented
software-as-property 30 years
ago](http://www.digibarn.com/collections/newsletters/homebrew/V2_01/gatesletter.html "And Microsoft as a company has run on the data-is-property metaphor ever
since.")), its business models aren't as entrenched as, say, music, so it'll
blaze the way in finding new ways to be sold. Also software has an inherent
lightness, which means it's suitable as a testbed for ideas that'll eventually
inform how businesses work around open hardware and other forms of data
(though of course it won't be directly translated, just as the Web is a
testbed for including social ideas in mobile phones and televisions without
direct translation). Software pricing models are try-outs for the future, just
like social software on the Web.

I ran across the [Celtx](http://www.celtx.com/pc.html "Word processor plus
business in the services.") script editing/collaboration application
[[thanks](http://del.icio.us/yoz "Thanks Yoz. Thoz.")]. It's free, with the
money coming from web services built into the interface.

This follows the model of applications like
[iPhoto](http://www.apple.com/ilife/iphoto/ "Built-in photo book
publishing."), which has integrated photo book publishing, and of course
[iTunes](http://www.apple.com/itunes/ "Though I wish they'd make it better at
its core tasks.") with its music store. [Linotype FontExplorer
X](http://www.linotype.com/fontexplorerX "Actually bloody useful.") follows
the iTunes model but is more interesting in that it gives away superb font
management software (something that used to be expensive) and, as its
commercial play, bundles access to an online store font (and buying fonts was
always somewhat tedious).

Until recently [Eudora](http://www.eudora.com/ "To be honest I don't know what
people saw in Eudora... but I understand their compulsion. I still believe
nothing's ever topped Claris Emailer 2.0.") had a paid and ad-supported mode,
and [Twitterific](http://iconfactory.com/software/twitterrific "Desktop
Twitter software.") can be used free of charge, supported by in-line
advertising.

Celtx, though, seems to represent something newer than these, something much
more mature, considered and integrated as a model:

But what a turnabout! Social software where the software's the commodity and
the social comes at a premium!

Where Celtx differs from end-user webapps is that web applications haven't
made a great showing with various levels of features for different levels of
paying. [Flickr offer stats to pro
users](http://blog.flickr.com/en/2007/12/13/stats-stats-baby/ "Graphs
a-plenty.") (and bandwidth), and blogging software has had a tradition of
pricing tiers (before Wordpress--who remembers Blogger Pro?), but these are
exceptions: in the main webapps are (a) ad supported, and (b) networked:
additional pay-for services are offered via non-exclusive affiliate links,
with the [end provider providing the functionality](http://moo.com/ "My point
being, moo.com is at moo.com, not at flickr.com and bebo.com and habbo.com.")
instead of integrating into the original webapp.

**Authenticity and going with the grain:**

There's something else that rings true about Celtx, and that's its
_authenticity_. The internet has helped reduce the variable unit price of
software close to zero (mod marketing and sales). In part due to improved
SDKs, IDEs, and APIs, open source, and the sharing of knowledge on the
internet, the barrier to entry and the cost of software development is
astoundingly low. It's possible - I don't have figures to back this up - that
the cost of developing (or licensing) a web front-end to manage sales,
registration and lost licenses for a piece of software like Celtx would
_exceed_ its original development costs.

The authenticity comes in because they will charge for what actually costs
money per unit, unlike the reproduction of software-as-data: collaboration
necessarily involves servers, which somebody has to host, and that costs
money. PDF generation involves expertise and money to install, host and scale.
And so on.

On top of authenticity is a sense of _going with the grain_ : whereas software
is simple to pirate without hard-to-code countermeasures, the use of a service
online is just not pirateable. This is the way physical property and
consultancy has always been sold, of course - in non-pirateable forms - and
paying only for the hard bit is not new. Two interesting twists elsewhere:
[CentOS](http://www.centos.org/ "Built from Red Hat by the community.") is a
free Linux distribution, built by the community from [Red Hat Enterprise
Linux](http://www.redhat.com/ "RHEL."). It's identical but free; with RHEL you
pay for support. Perfect for the difference between development and production
servers. And with [Mint web stats](http://haveamint.com/ "Web stats package
with beauty."), what you get for purchasing is the latest plug-ins and access
to the forum.

So while I agree that the qualities a software pricing methodology must have
are, [as identified by
ASG](http://www.asg.com/pdf/whitepapers/Restructuring_the_Software_Cost_Model_White_Paper_20020516en.pdf "Pretty good introduction to the enterprise pricing issues.") [pdf], budget
predictability, controllability, technological independence, value,
flexibility, and simplicity, I'd want to add to that those two above:
authenticity (because that provides simplicity and a sense of fairness), and
going with the grain (because it's easier, and automatically doesn't promote
piracy).

**Further questions:**

For all this discussion, where do new software pricing models get us? There
are a number of areas ripe for a further look.

My first job was at the Saturday boy in the local ironmongers and once,
cleaning the top storage shelves, I found a price label that'd been there
decades. Eric, my boss and one of the best men I have ever had the honour to
meet, told me about the way products were priced when _he_ was younger. The
iron lawn roller he'd sold had the price cast into the body of the machine
itself, because the price was as durable as the manufacturing process used to
make it. It's not so simple now.
