# Looking for new projects or even a long-term something for 2023

I’m looking for new collabs and projects for 2023 – also, potentially,
something long-term.

The most interesting stuff tends to be invisible and I’m not 100% sure what
the destination looks like so this post is an attempt to prompt engineer my
way there…

I split my time 80/20 last year. I’ve been heading up product and design at a
super early stage startup. We focused down on the social, spatial web - all
small groups and NPCs - and I had some of the most satisfying months of my
career in product exploration with [Ed](https://ed.blog),
[Florian](https://gradientreturn.com), and
[Andrew](https://andrewnicolaou.co.uk).

It was a joy to both steer and also rediscover my practice in sketching and
code – it’s always a kick to bounce between the high level (strategic or
speculative) and the hands-on of spreadsheets, Keynote prototypes, writing
React…

That has wrapped up for now. So I have room for new things in the mix.

I also continued my consultant editor role within Google Research, editing and
writing our internal publication on AI, and it continues to be eye-opening and
mind-fizzy. I’m very happy about some of the directions we pointed in.

Skimming back many years over [my
LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/genmon/) I alternate between creating
environments for others to push technology forward (like establishing and
running the first London accelerators for R/GA Ventures) and bringing my own
interests to bear. I find both rewarding and (one day) would love to find a
way to bridge the two.

Right now I’m especially interested in a few domains, familiar to anyone who
has been reading this blog…

I enjoy operating around product, design, vision, exploration, process,
leadership, direction, and pathfinding; generally when the problem space is
uncertain and complex, taking things from nothing to BAU.

Look this is a fuzzy prompt but hopefully you get the idea.

I don’t have a definite org size in mind. A small multidisciplinary team would
catch my eye. But whether that’s a small-ish startup, or R&D somewhere bigger,
or spinning up something new in another way, I don’t have a specific picture
in my head.

I’d be especially interested to speak with large orgs. I haven’t done that
before and I’d like to explore how that could work.

Like I said, I’m curious about a long-term role and also shorter projects (for
example I really enjoyed the [Action Cat collab](/home/2022/12/15/actioncat)
in December).

I live in London. Remote-first is good too, as is some travel.

I’d like to have a whole bunch of conversations! Please do
[email](mailto:matt@interconnected.org) or [book a
call](https://calendly.com/mwie/30min) – and share this folks you know who
seem like fellow travellers.

Thanks :)
