# Watching Nintendo think out loud about radar and music

I love watching companies when they’re thinking out loud. Because it gets me
thinking too (not necessarily in the same direction).

Case in point: two new products from Nintendo.

Watch [Nintendo’s announcement video for
Alarmo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dMqWTkgDt6A) _(YouTube),_ their new
shiny round red alarm clock with some fun features:

Alarmo responds to your body’s movement with game sounds, so you can feel like
you’re waking up in the game world itself.

There’s a sequence where the person is rolling in bed, half asleep, and Mario
coin sounds are rattling off. Subtitle: "[Super Mario Odyssey sounds
continue]"

Oooookay. Love it. Super weird.

Btw if two people are in bed then they _both_ have to get up before Alarmo
will silence.

How does it work? WELL.

Alarmo’s _millimeter-wave presence sensor_ works with bed sizes ranging from
twin to king…

That presence sensor is mmWave radar, and this is cutting edge tech.

Radar chips have applications in autonomous vehicles and robotics, but putting
them in consumer electronics is _fascinating._ Radar is hard to interpret -
it’s not a straightforward computer vision problem - but it can see through
(non-conductive) walls, it can be used (in theory) to pick out gestures and
eye blinks and breathing and heartbeats because it’s high resolution and
building up a 3D scene, and it’s on a chip and doesn’t require a camera.

Oh, and mmWave radar is low power – though interpreting the data requires
serious compute. [Here’s the Infineon site for their radar
sensors.](https://www.infineon.com/cms/en/product/sensor/radar-sensors/)

Like… what would you even do with mmWave radar?

What novel interactions would be enabled?

How would you, as a design team and as a company, develop sufficient
_opinions_ about how mmWave radar behaves in real-world environments and what
you could do with it? And what is it like to integrate, and what is the supply
chain like, and so on?

If you wanted to learn enough to develop (say) a whole console and ecosystem
around a brand new set of interactions enabled by a new technology, you’d
probably start with something self-contained first.

Like an alarm clock.

I’m not so interested when companies make concept videos. Sure, that promotes
internal and market alignment. But you’re not learning anything from at a
product strategy level.

I think, for really valuable _thinking out loud,_ a company has to embark on a
path that ticks every cell of a [business model
canvas](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_Model_Canvas). It’s [design
pathfinding](/home/2022/10/20/pathfinding) but scaled up a powers-of-10 level
or two.

That said, too much of this approach can be poisonous. Google is most
notorious… [Killed by Google](https://killedbygoogle.com) catalogues products
that must have taught Google an absolute ton _internally,_ but users and
customers feel somewhat burnt that they bought into something that was then
shut down.

Ideally you want something a product which is more self-contained.

**Alarmo** is in that wonderful Goldilocks zone.

RELATED: the South Sudan coffee supply chain.

I remember hearing Nespresso talk about making limited edition capsules with a
blend of coffee from South Sudan. Released in 2015.

South Sudan established as a country only in 2011.

Between 2011 and 2015, Nespresso [worked with South Sudanese coffee farmers to
revive their country’s coffee industry](https://nestle-
nespresso.com/news/Nespresso-Suluja-ti-South-Sudan-Second-Edition). Four
years!

So imagine what they had to work out… How to have communications channels and
on-the-ground representatives to manage quality control, how to move money
around, how to move _trucks_ around, how import/export works with a brand new
country, and so on.

So it’s a cross between thinking and loud and building the right muscles.

The second product from Nintendo, a new app:

Here’s the [Nintendo Music
announcement](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DQ5EeImWYaI) _(YouTube),_
available on iOS and Android.

So if you want to listen to the music from _Animal Crossing_ or _The Legend of
Zelda,_ that’s where to go. (If you’re a Switch Online subscriber anyway,
which regretfully I am not.)

And then there’s this feature, which easily makes Nintendo Music as
interesting as Alarmo:

_You can also extend the length of certain tracks._ By extending the length or
looping a track, you can spend more time with a particular song.

Wha.

You can extend certain special tracks to 15, 30, or 60 minutes.

I wonder, _I wonder_ what the underlying technology is that enables this. What
loops and samples are stored with what metadata; how is an exactly 60 minute
track made with satisfying narrative progression?

NOW.

I’ve talked before about how the interplay of today’s music apps, ID3 tags,
charts, the user interfaces, how people are paid… how all of it makes cements
the 3 minute track. It’s self-reinforcing; systemically obdurate.

But that captures such a narrow set of experiences with music.

Such as… well, I’m sure you’ve listened to [lofi hip hop
radio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jfKfPfyJRdk) _(YouTube)_ – "beats to
relax/study to" by Lofi Girl, with her infinite book studying and Paris
rooftops outside the window. _(It is such a missed opportunity for YouTube not
to be leaning into their live streams.)_

It’s so good.

I want Pomodoro music; music with a dramatic arc to take me through an evening
hacking on a weird proto; music to hit that deadline in exactly 53 minutes;
environmental music that is more like opening a [sound
window](/home/2023/05/26/windows).

Video games provide the ideal material and technology for this alternative
world, right?

As previously discussed: [Video game soundtracks, and a format for adaptive
long music](/home/2020/04/28/long_music) (2020).

If anyone could create and popularise a new music format, maybe it’s Nintendo?

Because these extrapolated tracks…

Extrapolation is very _now._ I would love for us, culturally, to [lean into
extrapolated art](/home/2023/11/03/beatles) (2023). Like, let’s figure out how
to make silk purse art from sculpted AI slop.

So I hope that’s what the folks at Nintendo are thinking about, the new
interactions possible with mmWave radar chips and extrapolated music both.

More organizations should explore and learn at this level.

Because I love trying to read the tea leaves. And also the groundless
speculation and imagination. All good fun.

BONUS LINK:

[A video of the orchestra recording Gusty Garden from Super Mario
Galaxy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qKlJmUg5uZU) _(YouTube)._
