# Post at 18.08, on Thursday 24 Feb 2011

Here is a brilliant [isometric map of Hong Kong.](http://hongkong.edushi.com/ "Slippy maps.")

[A topographic map of
Venus.](http://science.tumblr.com/post/3152319194/topographic-map-of-venus-
venus-is-interesting-in "And a few details.")

A gallery of the new [London 2012 Olympic
velodrome.](http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-12301465 "BBC News site.") It's vast
and modernist, but warm: cathedral caverns and concrete angles, both dull and
glossy, with highly textured detail from wood and punched brushed metal.
Unafraid of repetition. Oranges, browns, greys and dull blues. Matt Brown at
work calls it a _New British Modern,_ and I see that. It's definitely not New
York art vinyl or Japanese pop. There are elements of Scandinavian design, but
just as much of British municipality and of functional authenticity. Barbican
but 21st century. Anyway, good pics. There's mileage in this NBM I think.

[Five emotions invented by the internet,](http://thoughtcatalog.com/2011/five-
emotions-invented-by-the-internet/ "It's funny because it's true.") including:
"The state of being 'installed' at a computer or laptop for an extended period
of time without purpose, characterized by a blurry, formless anxiety undercut
with something hard like desperation," and "The sense of fatigue and
disconnect one experiences after emitting a massive stream of content only to
hit some kind of ‘wall’ and forget and/or abandon the entire thing." Yeah.
It's funny because it's true.

I wonder: I can fatigue very particular muscles. Climbing stairs, those
muscles get tired. Weights, etc. It's possible to have very tired biceps but
find it easy to run. Tiredness is a bodily located phenomenon. And so: is it
possible to fatigue bits of my mind? Does my super-ego get worn out from
filtering my behaviour? Can I run out of the neurotransmitter responsible for
saying three syllable words? Or whatever. Does my hypothalamus get out of
puff? Does my visual cortex get worn out identifying horizontal edges?

Today my linearity gland is _pooped._

First watch [Such Great Heights, the Postal
Service.](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0wrsZog8qXg "Electronica.") Pretty
electronica. And now [Ben Fold's live percussion
version.](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_56F04LoQD4 "Wine glasses and
piano.") Is lovely.
