# On the shift to oat and the milk hysteresis curve

We appear to be at a tipping point to oat milk for coffee, and it’s an
interesting case study in what change means and feels like.

I always specify “dairy” when I get my daily coffee, wherever I am. “Dairy
flat white” is the usual order.

The reason being that several years, when alt milks were becoming a thing, I
was asked what milk I wanted and I said _“normal”_ – at which point I got
scowled at because what is normal anyway.

And that made sense to me. And while I believe _rationally_ that being vegan
is probably the way of the future, _personally_ I quite like meat and milk, so
the minimum viable way for me to sit on the fence is to always specify dairy
but refuse to normalise it. So that’s what I’ve done since. My bit for the
cause.

_(My life is littered with these absurd and invisible solitary commitments.
Another one: I will always write the date as “3 April” instead of “April 3”
because humanity may one day live on a planet with a really long year and we
may want to have multiple Aprils, so better not be ambiguous.)_

Anyway, I’m used to the conversation going either like this:

Or:

Rarely - ok just once - I was told off by a shop for specifying “dairy” every
day because nobody has oat and, well, they see me every day and they remember
what I want.

But that was about 18 months ago.

_Recently_ pushback had decreased, quite a lot and quite suddenly.

So I’ve been idly asking coffee places what their proportion of dairy milk vs
oat milk is, when I get my daily coffee, wherever it is.

Near me, in south London, one of my local places is 60-70% oat over dairy
(factoring out coffees without milk). Another is 50/50, probably with oat
leading by a nose.

That’s the general picture round here.

I asked for a dairy flat white in _north_ London and got the old familiar
bafflement. Apparently east London is more alt milk again. There’s a
neighbourhood thing going on.

I’ve asked _why_ (at the majority oat places) and nobody really knows. Fashion
(one placed suggested); all alt milks are now oat; general awareness. I’ve
noticed that places rarely charge extra for alt milk now, that reduces
friction.

And then there’s a shift that prevents backsliding:

My (previously) favourite coffee place now tastes too bitter for me. Now, oat
milk is sweeter than dairy milk. To keep the flavour profile, you’ll need to
make the base coffee itself less sweet. So I swear they’ve changed their
blend.

This is interesting, right? We were in a perfectly fine status quo, and it
took some energy to change majority milk, but now the underlying coffee has
changed, we’re in a new status quo and it’ll take the same energy _again_ to
shift back. A hysteresis loop for milk.

So that’s the new normal, yet people still say “regular milk” to mean dairy
milk.

“Regular” does not mean, from the perspective of the coffee shop, the majority
of their milk-based coffees.

“Regular” means, from the perspective of the customer, the majority of their
consumed milk from their lifetime drinking coffee. Which is obviously biased
to the past.

So “regular” is a term of conservatism.

Not a right wing or libertarian or fundamentalist conservatism. But a kind of
“the default is what we did in the past” conservative. (Which would be a fine
position to have, by the way, because I don’t think we give enough respect to
wisdom that takes many generations to arrive at, and our current - and sadly
necessary - anti-conservatism - because of everything else with which it is
currently allied - undermines that position somewhat.)

Anyway so this is how we get old and conservative, I guess, by taking as our
yardstick our cumulative individual experience rather than a broader and
changing society.

And I could switch to oat milk too, I suppose, given dairy is tasting worse
now, but I’m trapped in my own habits, and I like the idea that, over the
coming decades, I’ll ascend into a kind of relative savagery, the final person
consuming _“normal”_ milk while the world changes around me.
