# Unbundling the office

Here’s a startup idea for anyone who wants it: outsourced, at-home video call
support. Sounds really boring. Isn’t.

If you run a big internal event, and you’re at a sufficiently large company,
there will be an AV (or IT) support team that comes round to make sure that
the projector is plugged in, the mics work, etc.

If you run a big _virtual_ internal event, and you’re at a sufficiently large
company, AV support will do the same only remotely. They’ll call up your
external speakers and attendees, and make sure they have Microsoft Teams,
Chrome, etc, installed and happily working with their webcam and so on. This
is good!

BUT

There are now a bunch of services which are delivered over video, to members
of the public, by companies where tech support is not a core competency. I’m
thinking of…

And if the video call fails - for whatever reason - the service can’t be
delivered and time is wasted.

So the startup should work like this:

If there’s actually going to be a permanent shift to doing things remotely,
we’ll need a service like this. Simply from a cost perspective… it doesn’t
make sense to have the expert nurse or teacher debugging any connection
problems when it can be done by somebody cheaper with economics of scale.

(If the government really wanted to keep the economy going, while people were
being furloughed they would have been building this service to offer at cost
to the public and private sector. By the time the life support money ran out,
there would have been a gangplank for companies that could to transition to a
WFH future. As it is, everyone is tackling the same problems but separately.)

Big picture, this is about unbundling the office.

What is the office _for?_ Yes it’s a place to work, but also

That last one is important. From the _New York Times_ last year about working
from home, a piece about weak ties: "the people with whom you rarely
communicate, perhaps 15 minutes a week or less."

When the pandemic hit: contact with weak ties dropped by 30%.

Oops:

But Waber contends that it’s those weak ties that create new ideas.
Corporations have historically seen some of the biggest new ideas emerge, he
says, when two employees who usually didn’t talk suddenly, by chance,
connected. But Waber contends that it’s those weak ties that create new ideas.
Corporations have historically seen some of the biggest new ideas emerge, he
says, when two employees who usually didn’t talk suddenly, by chance,
connected.

It’s _handy_ that the office is a single physical location such that
facilities is able to reach everyone in a cost-effective manner. But there’s
no essential reason that all these jobs of the office actually have to be
bundled up in the office.

Newspapers and magazines got unbundled. Banks are getting unbundled.

Offices are being unbundled.

[I talked about remote working perks last
year](/home/2020/09/08/remote_working_perks) and asked at the time: "is there
remote work facilities management that can come set up my desk and give me a
sound baffle/backdrop for my video calls?"

It turns out there is! [Hofy](https://www.hofy.co) is a remote facilities
management startup to give WFH employees chairs and monitors.

So this unbundling is why I don’t really buy virtual office approaches like
Facebook’s VR-based Horizon Workrooms: [Facebook’s Metaverse is a VR
Meetaverse](https://www.wired.com/story/facebook-horizon-workrooms-metaverse/)
_(Wired)._ Sure it might work for collaboration, but maybe there are better
software approaches for collaboration… and what about the rest of the office?
What about the nice chairs? Embrace the unbundling!

The most interesting part of the unbundling of the office is that it allows
companies to get smaller by divesting of in-house IT, in-house facilities,
long-term leases, etc. Anything that allows companies to get smaller is
interesting.

The oddest part of hybrid working, for me, is that I tend to spend my mornings
in a co-working spaces to be face-to-face with whichever teammates happen to
be around (ad hoc weak tie connections, see), and my afternoons at home on
Zoom for scheduled meetings.

Which means I commute over lunch, and mostly eat on trains.

So I choose my food based on what I can hold while I’m also on my phone while
I’m also maybe standing up.

Cornish pasties have a crust “handle” because they were traditionally eaten by
tin miners with dirty hands. What does my commute pasty look like?
