# Filtered for unknown lands

Two utterly gorgeous Twitter bots:

The last couple hundred years have been anomalous, historically: we’ve run out
of frontiers. Now humanity is pushing on two, outer space and [phase
space](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_space) – the space of all
possibilities, explored with algorithm probes. Who can say what we’ll find.

List of our [dwarf planets,](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dwarf_planet)
closest to the Sun first:

But Pluto shouldn’t be categorised as a dwarf planet – we’ve found out that
it’s a [binary planet with four chaotically orbiting
moons.](http://www.space.com/29559-pluto-moons-weird-orbit-chaos.html) What do
we even call that?

[Aquaterra,](https://news.ku.edu/2014/06/16/researcher-calls-attention-vast-
overlooked-zone-called-aquaterra) the various lands now under the ocean
previously populated by humans, roughly the size of North America.

“When scientists do mention aquaterra, they often call it a ‘land bridge’ as
if ancient people only used it to get from one place we know today to another
place we know today. This was not just a bridge. When sea level was low,
aquaterra was a vast coastal plain with population densities at least as great
as those in the lands above. There were houses, roads, villages and possibly
cities. It was all coastal, all flat, and mostly tropical - clearly the best
place to live during the ice ages.”

[Doggerland](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doggerland):

an area of land, now lying beneath the southern North Sea, that connected
Great Britain to mainland Europe during and after the last Ice Age. It was
then gradually flooded by rising sea levels around 6,500 or 6,200 BC. … It was
probably a rich habitat with human habitation in the Mesolithic period,
although rising sea levels gradually reduced it to low-lying islands before
its final destruction, perhaps following a tsunami caused by the Storegga
Slide.

[Radio Aporee](http://radio.aporee.org/), found via Warren Ellis’ newsletter
[Orbital Operations](http://orbitaloperations.com/) where he describes it as
"a constant stream of field recordings from all over the world."

[Rain.today](http://rain.today/): More radio. Continuous synthetic rain.

At the core of Rain.today, a stochastic audio engine generates a realistic
rain shower by randomly drawing sounds from different categories such as light
rain, heavier rain, thunder, and water sounds.

Short story. [The Library of Babel, by Jorge Luis
Borges.](http://hyperdiscordia.crywalt.com/library_of_babel.html)

The universe (which others call the Library) is composed of an indefinite and
perhaps infinite number of hexagonal galleries, with vast air shafts between,
surrounded by very low railings. From any of the hexagons one can see,
interminably, the upper and lower floors.

The books in the library are infinite, and the text - of 25 letters - appears
to be random - "the formless and chaotic nature of almost all the books" \- no
two identical.

One which my father saw in a hexagon on circuit fifteen ninety-four was made
up of the letters MCV, perversely repeated from the first line to the last.
Another (very much consulted in this area) is a mere labyrinth of letters, but
the next-to-last page says _Oh time thy pyramids._
