# Oikos vs polis: a new (but old) axis on the political map

Here’s an exchange on Twitter that illustrates the new schism in politics,
from May 2020:

Is it ok to put your family, or your tribe, above the law?

Unlike Holbo, I don’t believe that answering “yes” to that question is a
particular conservative or right wing trait. It’s a question that different
people will answer differently; it’s a new axis on the political map. Perhaps
it’s _the_ new axis.

_([Cory Doctorow has more comments on the exchange
here](https://pluralistic.net/2020/05/25/mafia-logic/#mafia-logic), again from
May 2020, where he relates it to pluralism vs elitism. Have a read – I’m going
in a similar-ish direction.)_

The [Political Compass](https://politicalcompass.org) has been a pretty good
model as long as I’ve been politically aware.

_(Caveats: I’ve only been paying attention to politics since the early 1990s.
And when I look back to say, the 1960s, before the free market ideology took
hold, the right seemed way happier to promote state intervention. So I don’t
know how it felt back then.)_

There are two axes, and you can take a test and end up somewhere on this grid:

But this implies that there’s a kind of universality to policy: it presupposes
that everyone is treated the same.

What if that no longer holds true?

The term _oikos_ has framed my thinking for a while. A few years back I read
Benjamin Peter’s [How Not to Network a
Nation](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/how-not-network-nation) which is a
great look at why there was never a successful Soviet internet, despite many
attempts between 1959 and 1989. From the blurb on the back, the book "argues
that the American ARPANET took shape thanks to well-managed state subsidies
and collaborative research environments, while the Soviet network projects
stumbled because of unregulated competition among self-interested
institutions, bureaucrats, and others."

Here’s the passage that grabbed my attention (p194 of my edition).

Consider the language of Hannah Arendt’s _The Human Condition_ \- a landmark
work of political theory that introduces its disenchantment with normative
liberal values with a discussion of Sputnik and the nuclear age, the two
ingredients that, once combined, could spell instantaneous planetary
annihilation. For Arendt, the distinction between the public and the private
is not the liberal economic opposition of the public state and the private
market but a classical (Aristotelian) distinction between _the public as an
expression of the \_polis_ (where actors gather “to speak and act together”)
and the private as an expression of the _oikos_ (Greek for _household_ and the
root of the word _economy_) (where actors inhabit a domain of animal necessity
and are compelled to pursue their own interests for their survival).\_

So this stuck in my head, and here’s my crude, way-over-simplified way of
thinking about it as a framework:

I was initially baffled when, in 2019, the Brexit Party announced its _only_
non-Brexit political policy: the abolition of inheritance tax. _([See the
announcement on
Twitter.](https://twitter.com/reformparty_uk/status/1170607704353624066))_

Why should this be sole additional policy? Why not remain silent? The _oikos
vs polis_ framework helped me. “Brexit” is a classic oikos preference: this
country matters more than this bigger union, it says. And if Brexit is the
macro, then removing inheritance tax is the micro: tribe over state.

But I want to be clear: **oikos is not bad.** Like any political preference,
it can be wielded for good and ill.

Community is an oikos value! Neighbourhood is an oikos value! Closing the
streets to city traffic so kids can play, that’s an oikos value! Mutuality and
cooperative organisations… traditionally left wing, but elements of oikos
there. _EastEnders,_ the long-running British TV soap about fierce family
loyalties: oikos.

The old English aristocracy: that’s oikos all over. As _The Institutional
Revolution_ points out ([I read this in December
2020](/home/2020/12/28/books)), the aristocracy was an economic adaption to a
world without reliable communications or measurement. To function, that world
required high trust relationships and ways to bind people into high trust
relationships. The aristocracy met that challenge for 300 years – and its
values of loyalty, honour, family, and so on are oikos values: trust and
defend my group over any other allegiance.

Now the right wing ruling class of the UK is closely connected with those old
aristocratic families. Is it any wonder they continue to display oikos
culture?

Anyway, my conclusion was that oikos is independent of left vs right;
independent of owner class vs labour class; independent of being socially
liberal or authoritarian.

This super insightful tweet is, to my mind, about the same thing:

I have a hunch the next important political divide won’t be right/left or
remain/Brexit - It will be between those who, in the face of climate crisis,
choose self-interest (the Doomers, Preppers) and those who choose solidarity
(XR, transition towns).

Self-interest: oikos. Solidarity: polis. (Though it strikes me that fighting
the climate crisis will require framing the solution in terms of self-interest
too.)

I usually try to avoid talking about day to day politics, but I need to for a
second. Before I do, I want to reinforce this point: **Oikos is not a bad
thing.** If I say someone is strongly on the oikos end of the spectrum, that
is _in no way_ a value judgement.

Boris Johnson is on the oikos end of the spectrum. For him, his family comes
first. His business relationships and financial wellbeing comes first, above
his duty to the country and perhaps even the spirit of the law. AND YET, in
recent elections, this has done him no harm.

Why? My feeling is that it’s because a lot of people in the country respect
his approach. Actually – they do the same. They care about their family, and
would put in a good word for them if it meant they would get a job, or tell a
white lie to the police if it got them out of a speeding ticket. They don’t
see anything wrong with campaigning hard for their town, or their football
team, because there is nothing wrong with these things!

And what Johnson is doing is progressing an oikos culture which means that
other strongly oikos people are in common cause with him. Sure, they’re not
favoured by Johnson personally, and actually they might be slightly damaged by
his actions, but that’s not the point: _in a wider sense, they’re on the same
side._

They’re on the same side regardless of where they were on the _old_ political
map.

For me, this helps explain the recent election results (where the Tory party
was not punished for Johnson’s self-interest) and also the coalition of
wealthy elite and working class that carried the “Leave” vote for Brexit.

Being able to say: “aha, that is an example of oikos common cause” has been
enormously illuminating to me. It has never been about populism or
nationalism, or right and left; those are just symptoms.

So there’s no point in attacking politicians for displaying oikos values. What
some people see as selfish, others see as upstanding.

Perhaps the value of the polis needs to be shored up. Solidarity, equality in
the eyes of the law, utilitarianism: these are ideas that need to be re-
established.

The right has claimed oikos for its own. That makes sense: it’s a natural fit
for neoliberalism (free market economics), and also for small government
(because you should look after your own). But I don’t believe this necessarily
has to be the case. What should the left fight for in an oikos world? A vital
question.
