# One year of Job Garden weeknotes, with links

I missed the anniversary: it’s now week 61 of [Job
Garden](https://job.garden). I write weeknotes on the Job Garden blog and
they’re invisible here, so to rectify that: here are links to all the posts to
date. Expect a combination of feature releases and rambling tangents about the
old days of the internet.

This is more for me than you, so I’ll point out any particular post which I
think is worth a read.

Until this point, Job Garden was _personal:_ just a place for me to share jobs
at companies I’m connected with in some way (i.e. that I’ve invested in either
personally or more likely via R/GA Ventures, or ones I advise, or they’re run
by mates).

Now, as an experiment, since a few others had asked if they could also use Job
Garden, I started opening it up a bit.

But still very much a hobby. That’s one of the things I like about Job Garden:
it’s well within my comfort zone to build and design, so as a hobby it’s
perfect because it’s about craft and doing things “properly”… and whether that
means “100% working” or “opinionated” I’ll leave open.

Here’s a post in its own section because it still gets a bunch of traffic. So
maybe you would like to read it too?

These next few months feel like their own chapter… adding a few more friends
to garden their own job boards, and the general data and design improvements
required in consequence:

Ah, and at this point [Stella was
born](https://www.instagram.com/p/BqUgscXgGfu/). So everything stopped until
week 50.

That 17 week period - four and a bit months - was interesting (baby aside,
which _of course_ is interesting and joyful and awesome and all kinds of
superlatives, but I’m talking about JG here) because it gave me room to think
about Job Garden. And remember it’s still a hobby at this point!

Coming into 2019, a handful of my users got in touch and asked for additional
features. So I looked at what I’d built and I thought: it’s rare that you make
something that does a valuable thing and also people want to use it enough
that they’re requesting features. Then I thought: I should take this more
seriously.

So the chapter that follows is the chapter of: work on Job Garden enough that
I can tell whether or not to take it seriously.

I’m not on JG full time. I’m working on other things too. I get up at 6 and
work on Job Garden then, and I work at night after the family have gone to
bed. During the day I often work on JG but I also have other gigs, and I’m a
parent too, and the parent bit gets priority.

Perhaps there’s something commercial in Job Garden that doesn’t compromise the
value it provides to the startups I care about (that’s one of our overriding
principles. We’ve got 12.). Perhaps not, and if there’s not then the worst
thing that will happen is that we’ve built something good.

The goal for this year is to figure out whether there _is_ something
commercial and uncompromising there. If that’s the case, I’ll take JG
seriously at that point.

So the rest of the weeknotes (till now, I guess) are in that chapter.

They are also less frequent, and seem to be more about feature releases
although of course with regular tangents. Here:

That brings us up to date.

Reading all these weeknotes back, just now, it also feels like the end of a
chapter, or at least a subchapter: having shipped autotags and the new design,
Job Garden basically represents what was in my head pre week 1. Sure there
needs to be more data on which to pivot, and more ways to receive alerts about
new jobs, etc, and there is a _ton_ to do around that, but that’s all just a
matter of colouring between the lines.

I feel like now everything’s on the table; the basic Lego bricks have been
made; the frame has been created. So it’s time to figure out what to do with
those pieces, and the motivations for what to prioritise from the roadmap
(which is _big_ believe me) will be different from what they’ve been so far.

Which means year 2 will feel different. Exactly how I’ll have to see in next
year’s retrospective.
