# Post at 12.50, on Thursday 25 Oct 2007

One of [Niven's Laws](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Niven's_Laws "Larry Niven,
the sci-fi author, keeps a list of laws about how the universe works.") states
that FÃ—S=k or, to put it another way, the product of freedom and security is a
constant (so the greater the security of a society, the lower the freedom
within it).

I'm not sure I agree. By [Ashby's Law of Requisite
Variety](<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variety_(cybernetics)> "A cybernetics
terms I picked up from Stafford Beer's 'Platform for Change.'"), the control
system must have sufficient states to absorb the number of possible states of
the system being controlled. In more concrete language: a more complex control
system (police, legal system and so on) allows _more_ freedom of the society,
in terms of allowed states, not less.

Note that this is discussing states of society as a whole, which doesn't
correspond with individual freedom. For example: consider a society with 2
citizens. The first citizen has the freedom to occupy the states black/white,
and the second to occupy red/green. There are 4 possible society states. But
if both citizens have the freedom to occupy black/white, there are degenerate
states at the society level: there are only 3 distinguishable society states.

(Also note that I'm equating security with having a more developed system of
control, said system allowing feedback (such as locating and disarming a bomb)
to occur.)

What this means, for freedom and control, is that increased control can buy us
two different types of freedom: greater individual freedom, and greater
freedom _to be different from other people_. Control (and decreasing personal
freedom of the first type) allows us to have a more heterogeneous society.

(Implications? Individuals in a factory are freer than individuals in a
conglomerate because they're all free _in the same way_ and the factory-
society can afford more of that for the same level of control. And a society
comprised of a large number of similar villages can also afford more
individual freedom than a society in which some individuals are allowed to
express global freedom, via fame.)
