# Orbits and hardware

Open in my browser right now:

[Planar
Choerographies.](http://www.maths.manchester.ac.uk/~jm/Choreographies/) We’re
all familiar with stable orbits in a two body system: it’s how the earth goes
round the sun. The earth describes a big circle, the sun a little one, and
both are centred on their mutual centre of gravity. It turns out there are
stable orbits for n-bodies too, and they’re lovely. I wonder what it would be
like to live on a planet in a _seven on a butterfly_ solar system.

[Wired interview with Bill
Gates.](http://www.wired.com/magazine/2013/04/qa_gates/) Saved 5 million
lives, _and_ he’s funny? Dammit.

[The pitch deck Buffer used to raise
$500,000.](http://onstartups.com/tabid/3339/bid/98034/The-Pitch-Deck-We-Used-
To-Raise-500-000-For-Our-Startup.aspx) Great pitch deck. A simple story, well
told.

[Chris Dixon on hardware startups.](http://cdixon.org/2013/04/30/hardware-
startups/) A big factor in why hardware is possible now? "The peace dividend
of the smartphone war." (Chris Anderson.) Chris Dixon lists a few points to
keep in mind: Manufacturing (no Amazon Web Services for production);
defensibility (no network effects); planning (it’s not agile); B2C vs B2B
(attention vs margins).

I’m gonna add four other points of differentiation from software. One is
distribution, both attention and fixing shipping things. Is hard. Incumbents
win. Second is funding: margins are lower, you have working capital tied up in
stock, the pipeline is slower. Third is complexity. Connected products (and
that’s my concern) have mechanical parts, embedded software,
connectivity/protocols, and cloud software. These need to move in sync, and
it’s hard to tell what takes the lead. The fourth point is business model –
the business model of products is already moving into flux. It’s about to go
chaotic.

Further reading: [Indiepocalypse](http://waxy.org/2013/01/indiepocalypse/)
(Andy Biao): "For hundreds of years, publishers across every industry - book
publishers, record labels, film studios, videogame publishers - solved
problems for artists in four major ways:" being, **Funding, Production,
Marketing, Distribution.** And the internet is disrupting all four of these
simultaneously.

The way I think about this is the “fat middle.” In each industry - say, news -
we’ve had the dominant head (New York Times) and long tail (round robin
newsletters). In music? Dominant head of stadium tours and U2, and the long
tail of bar gigs. The internet’s flattened the curve, and a fat middle has
arisen. In news, major blogs: Engadget, the Verge, etc. Music: see all of
YouTube.

So… a fat middle of hardware? Yup. It’s happening. Cool.

Now I can close my tabs.
