# Countdown clocks, zines, and an imagined website from 2001

There’s a website from 2001 for making zines with your friends that, at this
point, only exists in my head, if it _ever_ existed honestly, but I wish it
were in the world, because in this age of WhatsApp and Slack and whatever, we
need it. There are ideas at the bottom of this post.

Here’s how this fictional website worked, in my memory, which is maybe
(probably) false:

Perhaps, with the countdown clock, there are even DEFCON levels before going
to press: content freeze 3 days ahead of launch, _12 hours to go, everyone
scramble to submit your story;_ it’s the last 24 hours, only minor edits and
deletions allowed; and so on. Everyone can see the clock, it’s a forcing
function.

In my head, this website is super easy to use. Church groups use it for their
monthly newsletter, teams at work use it for their weekly updates, writing
groups use it to publish an online magazine, school classes use it.

**Did this website actually exist?**

It is _possible_ that it existed, for 9 days, almost two decades ago. The
memory of that website is what I keep coming back to.

Waaaaaay back in early 2001, I got excited about a tool named **Organizine**
which was a tool for groups (not individuals) to make websites. [Here’s my
write-up at the time](/home/2001/01/03/organizine_is_a), and [here’s what the
founder said about
it](http://web.archive.org/web/20010128180000/http://www.trenchant.org/rants/50.html).
I think it launched publicly on the last day of 2000, and closed (for personal
reasons, according to the message on the site) on 9 January.

You will notice that, in neither of those write-ups, is there mentioned a
_“time to press”_ countdown clock.

AND YET – I have been talking about _Organizine_ for, I am not kidding, 19.5
years now, and I have mentioned that countdown clock every time. Did I make it
up? Perhaps. It looks like it. Who knows. It’s a good idea though.

I really want this website, or app, or whatever it is.

**Here are the key features:**

What going on here is there’s some kind of public, static production emanating
from a private and ephemeral small group of people. There is _just_ enough
structure, with roles and sign-off gates, and the clock of course, to get the
group to self-organise.

**In 2020, I want to apply this pattern wherever I see a place where small
groups gather.**

We’re in a golden age for online teamwork and community. WhatsApp groups,
Slack and Discord, meetings in Zoom, social media like Facebook and Twitter –
there have never been more ways to socialise and work _together_ online.

But what I’d like more of is the ability for those groups to produce something
together. [Barn raising.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barn_raising) And the
artefacts of those collective efforts… zines, videos, visual art, screenplays:
things which are _finished._ _Complete._ Not posts in Facebook groups.
Websites.

I’m missing the durable, ever-increasing “stock” in [Robin Sloan’s stock and
flow](http://snarkmarket.com/2010/4890). More abstractly, it’s [Walter Ong’s
orality and literacy](https://newlearningonline.com/literacies/chapter-1/ong-
on-the-differences-between-orality-and-literacy) and what we’ve got now is an
oral culture – lively, vibrant, fluid… but temporary and somehow unable to
reach the deeper and nuanced ideas that literature culture affords.

**So, some ideas.**

A private wiki or [Notion](https://www.notion.so) instance that has a special
zone that auto-publishes editions of a static website, once a month.

A [Slack](https://slack.com) workspace that has a special _#links_ channel,
and every Friday it gets compiled into a newsletter, sent to whoever is online
for a quick review, and posted out to all subscribers. Emailed replies to the
newsletter are directed back into Slack, where they appear like messages in
bottles.

A WhatsApp group for a club committee, attached to a Google Drive folder with
a fixed set of Google Docs in it, an once a week the content of the docs gets
swept through pre-set templates and published as a PDF and emailed out to the
membership.

A [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com) repo that accepts all changes that
are made to it, by anyone, and auto-publishes a website – but as issues, so
previous issues are available at sequential URLs – and only on Thursdays.

A shared album in the iOS Photos app for a family that lives apart and, for
Christmas, after paste-ups are shared for editing on 1 December, the photos
are automatically printed into books that are mailed out to all the
households.

A drag-and-drop [Figma](https://www.figma.com) canvas that a design group
drops and arranges inspiration image into, and every couple of weeks it all
gets printed with [Newspaper Club](https://www.newspaperclub.com).

An email list for a writing group, and any Microsoft Word doc forwarded to a
special email address gets posted to Drafts in a
[WordPress](https://wordpress.com) blog, and the next story, whatever it is,
is pulled from the queue and published every Friday.

A postbox in Animal Crossing which posts to a Tumblr blog for your town, at
midday daily, and it’s frozen for an hour at 11am so the town owner gets to
edit if they want.

All built for small groups to work together, simultaneously with them chatting
and hanging out.

All with the ability for some kind of audience (website visitors, newsletter
readers) to subscribe to the artefacts, whatever they are.

And all, of course, having - large, in the top corner of every screen,
monotonically decreasing - the imperturbable presence of the clockwork
publisher, this feature which maybe I imagined and maybe was there in 2001,
but which is vital, the moment of cutting the cloth which gives the creative
act its edge, showtime itself: the countdown clock.
