# Dragonfly drones and orthogonal invention

A dragonfly-shaped and dragonfly _-sized_ spy drone, developed by the CIA in
the 1970s: the [Insectothopter](https://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-history/heroic-
failures/meet-the-cias-insectothopter).

I like the control/data link: "A laser beam directed at a bimetallic strip in
the insectothopter’s tail guided the device. That same laser beam acted as a
data link for the miniature acoustic sensor onboard the craft."

This was five decades ago!

You have to wonder, what could be done today. Smart dust, powered by energy
harvested from ambient electric fields, exfiltrating voice and data on ad hoc
mesh networks, controlled by long-distance laser.

And I know I’ve previously gone on about [weaponised artificial
weather](/home/2020/06/30/space_and_weather), banned by the UN in 1976.

Artificial hurricanes and what-not.

Well you don’t have to dig very far into conspiracy theory sites until you
read rumours about artificial _earthquakes,_ triggered by satellites. The
story goes that the satellites were being tried out on Afghanistan. There was
a big earthquake in Iran that is a conspiracist candidate. Etc.

Nonsense.

BUT.

Here’s a paper in _Scientific Reports_ from just recently, July 2020: [On the
correlation between solar activity and large earthquakes
worldwide](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-020-67860-3).

The tentative model put forward…

Our observed correlation implies that a high electric potential sometimes
occurs between the ionosphere, charged by the high proton density generated at
higher distances, and the Earth. Such a high potential could generate, both in
a direct way or determining, by electrical induction, alterations of the
normal underground potential, an electrical discharge, channeled at depth by
large faults, which represent preferential, highly conductive channels. Such
electrical current, passing through the fault, would generate, by reverse
piezoelectric effect, a strain/stress pulse, which, added to the fault loading
and changing the total Coulomb stress, could destabilize the fault favoring
its rupture.

Activity from the Sun causes earthquakes. Perhaps. I would take it all with a
grain of salt.

But _if_ you were to take that paper seriously, _IF,_ and _if_ you worked in
that direction for five decades, perhaps earthquake satellites is exactly
where you’d end up.

For the purposes of this post, I’m not really interested in whether the above
examples are _true._

What I’m interested in is how a non-mainstream approach could in theory lead
somewhere very, very different, simply through working in secret and the
application of time.

From that perspective: it’s not that smart dust and earthquake satellites
(should they exist) are particularly advanced, or at least any more advanced
than, say, an iPhone. It’s that they have developed orthogonally to the rest
of technology for 50 years, and so they _appear_ to be highly advanced, from a
relative standpoint.

In Neal Stephenson’s wonderful speculative fiction
[Anathem](https://www.nealstephenson.com/anathem.html), communities of
science-savvy monks live in communities that are isolated from the rest of the
world for variously one year; ten years; a hundred years; a thousand years. In
that time they are able to diverge from the mainstream, and return with new
insights.

Sometimes they diverge too much… From _Anathem,_ which includes a dictionary:

**to go Hundred:** (Derogatory slang) To lose one’s mind, to become mentally
unsound, to stray irredeemably from the path of theorics. The expression can
be traced to the Third Centennial Apert, when the gates of several Hundreder
maths opened to reveal startling outcomes, e.g.: at Saunt Rambalf’s, a mass
suicide that had taken place only moments earlier. At Saunt Terramore’s,
nothing at all–not even human remains. At Saunt Byadin’s, a previously
unheard-of religious sect calling themselves the Matarrhites (still in
existence). At Saunt Lesper’s, no humans, but a previously undiscovered
species of tree-dwelling higher primates. At Saunt Phendra’s, a crude nuclear
reactor in a system of subterranean catacombs.

And I do sometimes wonder about us all emerging from lockdown, and households
having in the meantime… meandered. And so you meet one friend and they no
longer get up before noon; and another and it turns out they’ve gone really
deep on weird boxsets and assume you know everything; and you meet another and
they’re speaking a completely different form of English, and another and
you’re like, oh so you’ve invented a new kind of trousers now, and so on, but
all of us fully believe that _we’re_ the normal ones.

Invention as working in the open vs deliberately working in a bubble.

It’s interesting because it reframes invention from being a _leap,_ which can
only be achieved by special people, a magical act, to being a series of quite
ordinary steps but simply in a different direction, which anyone could do
given the right setup and sufficient time.

I wonder how to capture that divergence in

Maybe it would make sense to refuse to speak to anyone about your creative
work for, say, a year, and not read anything new on the internet, and not look
at anything that anyone else makes or says in that time. But instead having a
discipline of working and building on the previous day’s work, every single
day, and seeing where you get to by the anniversary.

Or, as a country or a company, get smart people who are young and don’t have
built-in filters yet, and just set them to work – freely but on their own. And
every so often, dip in and pluck out something from that orthogonal world and
bring it back to our world, and see how it differs.
