# Towards the Orthogonal Technology Lab, v0.1

These are notes towards setting up a research lab that doesn’t yet exist. It
doesn’t _need_ to exist; I’m learning by writing, and what I learn might lead
anywhere (or nowhere).

In my Thingscon talk I ended with this call:

So I guess what I’m asking for is a different kind of think tank, not one that
works with recommendations and reports and regulation, but **a new think tank
that trades in politically opinionated, worked examples that demonstrate,
demystify, and de-risk.**

What we need are visions of the future of technology that are values-driven,
but "we don’t need just design fictions. We need business model fictions,
engineering feasibility study fictions, interop protocol specification
fictions, investment return fictions."

My rationale is that it’s _those_ kind of worked examples that speak to the
many groups that, together, shape the tech landscape. The purpose is to scout
the path and shift the discourse.

This post is a first stab at defining a lab to invent and publish these worked
examples. Do I believe this lab will happen? Well obviously it’s something I
would love to do but, no, not necessarily. In the spirit of
Gedankenexperiment, the exercise itself is informative.

I’m not wedded to the name _“Orthogonal Technology Lab”_ but I’ve chosen it as
a placeholder from my post about [orthogonal
innovation](/home/2020/10/07/orthogonal), "a series of quite ordinary steps
but simply in a different direction" \- which can lead to a place very, very
different from contemporary tech.

The document version is **v0.1.** All I’m trying to do is capture and
structure what’s already in my head.

Research areas TBD and there’s a necessary mapping exercise, but I would want
to cover areas such as:

What this _isn’t_ is about developing new tech for its own sake, or creating
new business models where currently none are established. Which means no
drones or cryptocurrency.

If there’s an underlying thesis, it’s to look in places where Srnicek’s
[platform capitalism](https://www.ippr.org/juncture-item/the-challenges-of-
platform-capitalism) has taken hold, leading to data-driven captured
marketplaces, and that’s impeding technology development to the detriment of
the consumer. Given that view, something like ad micro-targeting is a
_symptom_ of platform capitalism and not something to be rethought directly.
Instead we start by rethinking the captured activity itself.

So there’s a focus on B2C, rather than enterprise, and there’s a focus on the
smart assembling of existing tech rather than innovating new tech - though
that’s not to say that patentable technology won’t be found.

The desired outcome is influence in shipped products and services, and that’s
tough to quantify, especially as an independent lab.

There are a couple of models here:

None of these are particularly good proxies to influence, except perhaps
patent licensing.

**Artefacts:**

The idea is to follow early product innovation processes, but ship all the
collateral _around_ the product rather than the product itself. So…

**Engagement:**

Innovation doesn’t happen in a vacuum. So communications and audience
engagement are an output all of their own - everything from continuously
explaining the work, to open research newsletters. Although these aren’t the
primary outcomes, it feels important to translate work into policy papers and
MBA decks too.

There are a couple of non-traditional activities that are worth looking at
here:

**Commercial opportunities:**

Eventually you’d want a lab like this to stand up on its own.

The trick is to pick a model with aligns with the mission (without adding too
much overhead), and focus on that from day 1. It may not come to fruition, but
I think it’s necessary as a hedge against the loss of funding.

**Process:**

Putting aside the engagement and commercial activities, the core activity
probably follows a standard innovation pipeline. There’s concepting,
prototyping, and development work, all separated by gates, and a healthy cull
at each gate.

Portfolio management is about ensuring all stages of the pipeline are active.
Looking at the [four types of innovation](https://hbr.org/2015/06/you-need-an-
innovation-strategy) I would say this is more about “disruptive” and “routine”
innovation, where there are new business models but no new fundamental tech.
But the outcomes may point the way to future tech research.

**Team:**

One question is about how much is done internally, within the lab, versus how
much is done by commissioning.

My first best guess that there’s a small, multi-disciplinary internal team of
design, tech architecture, and business analysts, and that’s the early,
concepting part of the timeline.

Engagement/communications and program management are also in-house.

Then prototypes, technical protocols, and other builds are all commissioned.

You probably also need a permanent fundraising or partnerships function, plus
management. Other support functions such as owning the art and fellowship
programs, and commercialisation/patents, can probably be done on a freelance
basis.

Talking about the team is a long way downstream from what matters - the
outcomes - but it’s worth sketching out. What is this… 8-10 people plus a
strong commissioning budget?

The purpose of the above is to figure out the funding requirements.

What’s a full innovation cycle… Three years? Four years? What’s the full
loaded budget for that, given the team and activities? It should just be a
matter of doing the sums to come up with the number.

That will give an indication of whether funding the lab is possible with grant
funding, or whether there needs to be a different approach.

These are v0.1 thoughts, with the main purpose being to get them out of my
head.

I’m not ready to get my pitch deck and spreadsheet out quite yet. Like I said,
this is a thought experiment, and working it through will teach me something.
Maybe I can take what I learn into a client engagements in adjacent areas, or
maybe it’ll give me a lens to understand historic research labs.

But here are the specifics that I’m thinking through, as a result of writing
the above:

**Next steps:** Socialising these ideas (hence this blog post), listening to
feedback, and seeing whether thoughts are sparked, directly or indirectly.
