# My old Richter scale for system outages, revisited

_It’s follow-up week! I’m blogging new words about old posts._

Re: [A Richter scale for outages](/home/2015/03/12/richter_scale_for_outages)
_(2015)._

Following a flurry of system outages (part of the Visa network was down, then
iCloud for a bit) I scribbled some notes about quantifying the disruption…

Like the Richter magnitude scale, each magnitude is incrementally ten times
bigger. So 4.0 is 100x bigger than 2.0. But like apparent magnitude it’s
subjective: The scale of the human effect is taken into account.

Here’s what I reckon the scale might look like.

Full details in the post, but some highlights:

It’s an idea that keeps coming back in my head since 2015. It feels like it
would be useful to have in the public discourse! It’s not like we’re going to
have _fewer_ system outages in the future.

But I’ve never been really satisfied with the scale itself. I’ve always been
meaning to try to put my finger on why.

**[Beaufort wind force scale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beaufort_scale)**
(1805) – I like how practical, human, and sometimes poetic this is. Beaufort 2
is: "Wind felt on face; leaves rustle." Beaufort 12, hurricane-force:
"Devastation."

I think one of the reasons it works so well is that the lower numbers are very
everyday, so it you can extrapolate and build a visceral understanding of
extreme and rare events.

**[Kardashev scale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kardashev_scale)** (1964) –
the classic scale of cosmic civilisational complexity, as measured by energy
use. Type I: like the Earth, a planet making use of energy ultimately derived
from its sun. Type II: a civilisation which has captured the _entire_ energy
of its sun, for example by building a Dyson sphere around the star. Type III:
as II but able to direct the energy of an entire galaxy.

Not sure how applicable the Kardeshev scale is here but it’s fun…

**[Rohn Emergency Scale](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rohn_emergency_scale)**
(2006) – this scale has three independent dimensions: **scope** (measured in %
of max population, or % loss in GDP); **topography** ("the estimated visual
fractional change in the environment" – the collapse of a house is high; the
collapse of a stock exchange is low); and **speed of change.**

It’s more of a descriptive framework than a scale, I’d say. I like that speed
of change is in there.

**[Viking Impact Magnitude](https://www.kth.se/en/om/nyheter/centrala-
nyheter/nu-ska-elavbrott-matas-som-jordbavningar-1.309118)** (2012) aka “A
Richter Scale for Power Outages” – this paper shows how the scale is derived
in a bottom-up fashion, which is super interesting. It’s rigorous, but again
there’s the focus on the human impact. The scale of 1–10 is "obtained by
multiplying the number of affected people by the duration of the
interruption."

The scale makes different events comparable: for example a 2007 cyclone in
Sweden has the same impact as an earthquake, or maybe a hacker attack. Then
the scale number can be correlated with a $ cost.

ALSO, one fictional datapoint. **The jackpot,** coined by William Gibson in
_The Peripheral_ (2014) and [summarised here](/home/2022/02/09/apocalypsi).
The climate crisis, mass extinctions; no more bees, antibiotics exhausted;
rolling pandemics and water shortages, just… all of it and all at once.
Whatever the scale is, the jackpot is the Big One.

Learning from the above, a revised scale should ideally:

I wonder how to include some measure of damage. Like, a 7 day WhatsApp outage
would be a massive main but you can route around it _(although not if
you’re[an informal worker in
Brazil](https://www.theverge.com/22734705/facebook-whatsapp-outage-brazil-
informal-workers-economy))._ A 7 day water outage is a catastrophe in the
making.

But maybe that’s not for this? A Richter 8.0 earthquake in the middle of a
city and a Richter 8.0 in the remote wilderness are given the same number on
the scale. You differentiate by giving the location.

Also under damage I’d put “effort to remedy.” Like, is it a reboot required,
or a product recall?

A thought experiment: the [8 years and counting Flint water
crisis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flint_water_crisis) is a water
infrastructure disaster affecting 100,000 residents. In terms of damage, it’s
way up there – but the remedy has taken its time probably due to a lack of
will rather than actual severity.

Compare with a WhatsApp outage that is less sever but would affect _2 billion_
users. Should they both be a 6.5? Or do we add context – is WhatsApp a
widespread 4 and Flint a localised 8? The latter I think.

Being careful to specify the location answers many of my concerns I think.
Twitter lost its timeline for a couple of hours the other day; we could
describe that as a short sharp Twitter-localised 3.5, just enough to remind us
of what we might lose, and you’d known what I meant.

One thing I’m certain of: this scale is for _system_ outages. If there’s a
fault on a weather satellite, then it’s not the satellite that this scale is
concerned with, it’s our weather forecast infrastructure generally.

Taking all of this into account, the scale in that old blog post stands up ok.
I’d add some notes about usage and interpretation but that’s it.

**So I’m going to leave the 2015 scale intact for now.**

It needs a v2. But the purpose of that work should be to refine and add
rigour. It should start with collected examples, and work to define its terms
on both infrastructure and impact.

That’s not something I can do on my own…

However there are not one but _two_ upcoming books about infrastructure I am
excited about: _Public Utility_ by [Debbie Chachra](http://debcha.org) (she
briefly ran me through the core argument and I can’t wait). And, by [Georgina
Voss](https://gsvoss.com/about), her new book on complex systems for Verso. I
don’t know the title but I got a preview of the chapter topics and I am
equally psyched.

Which means my next step is to wait until those are published, inhale them
both, chase down some references, and then start buying people coffee until
someone who actually knows what they’re talking about wants to co-author a
paper.
