# The Overton window of weirdness is opening

The future could get weird quite quickly.

I mentioned a few of these in my [Milan talk about dreaming and
hallucination…](/home/2024/05/03/dreaming)

Such as [Figure](https://www.figure.ai) which is making AI-powered humanoid
robots. It’s not super hard, it turns out. Once the mechanical stuff is done,
the rest is software. And [as I mentioned](/home/2024/06/07/agenda) AI agents
for instruction following are really easily.

So how long before I can say "hey siri make me a table" and it gives me a list
of things to approve, then shows a shopping list and asks for my credit card
number, and then it just does the rest overnight. No more Ikea.

I’m not sure whether [Project CETI](https://www.projectceti.org), the project
to "listen to and translate the communication of sperm whales," will bear
fruit.

But I would purchase the heck out of a book of cetacean poetry.

A Dyson sphere is a speculative structure built by highly advanced alien
exocivilisation: instead of a planet, a vast shell built around a whole star
to capture its entire energy output.

People have been looking for aliens by looking for the energy signatures of
Dyson spheres: [there are seven strong candidates](https://www.centauri-
dreams.org/2024/05/18/seven-dyson-sphere-candidates/).

_(They’re not using my technique of[counting white
dwarfs](/home/2023/06/23/sun). Do you have data? Let’s try it.)_

So maybe we’ll have proof of aliens soon.

[LK-99 was a bust.](/home/2023/08/04/spindizzy) But it renewed interest in
room-temperature superconductors. What if they find one and then we’ll have
abundant energy and quantum locking hoverboards.

There’s a pair of AI-stabilised supercharged shoes called
[Moonwalkers](https://shiftrobotics.io/products/moonwalkers) and, when you
walk, you move at the speed of a sprint.

The reviews seem good:

It’s like being on those airport walkways that move you along just that little
bit quicker

$1,399 is a little steep but… prices come down, right?

In the [Vesuvius Challenge](https://scrollprize.org), researchers are using AI
to decipher a library of scorched papyrus scrolls buried in the ancient city
of Herculaneum.

So far they’ve decoded 1,000 words and [now we know exactly where Plato was
buried](https://www.theguardian.com/books/article/2024/may/03/how-scholars-
armed-with-cutting-edge-technology-are-unfurling-secrets-of-ancient-scrolls).

There are many, many scrolls to go.

The end of the Middle Ages, the beginning of the early modern period, the
European [Renaissance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance):

The Renaissance’s intellectual basis was founded in its version of humanism,
derived from the concept of Roman humanitas and _the rediscovery of classical
Greek philosophy._

So maybe we have another one of those to look forward to.

There is an Overton window of weirdness, which I will define here as the range
of things on which it is acceptable to spend one’s time, and when it is narrow
we are optimisers, and when it is wide there is a societal random walk and
discoveries are made, which might be mundane or might be profound, robot shoes
and aliens, and whether you’re working on personal weird art or [unsettling
product design](/home/2021/01/14/disturbing_products) or [speculative plasma
physics](/home/2022/03/02/wheels) it doesn’t matter, I celebrate you, you’re
contributing to the opening of the window, thank you, we will all of us
benefit. There are cathedrals everywhere for those with the eyes to see, [as
they say](https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/there-are-cathedrals-everywhere-for-
those-with-the-eyes-to-see).

Oh! I wrote that piece about [Douglas Adams era
technology](/home/2024/02/21/adams) back in February.

I was absolutely honoured to be invited by [Sam
Arbesman](https://arbesman.net) to speak about it on his new podcast, _The
Orthogonal Bet_ with Lux Capital.

[Here’s the newsletter announcement with
more](https://www.luxcapital.com/securities/remains-of-the-day-june-1-2024):

We latched onto Matt’s recent essay about a vibe shift that’s underway in the
tech world from the utopian model of progress presented in Star Trek to the
absurd whimsy of Douglas Adams and The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy. Along
the way, we also discuss Neal Stephenson, the genre known as “design fiction,”
Stafford Beer and management cybernetics, the 90s sci-fi show Wild Palms, and
how artificial intelligence is adding depth to the already multitalented.

[Listen to the episode
here.](https://podcasters.spotify.com/pod/show/riskgaming/episodes/Orthogonal-
Bet-A-technology-vibe-shift-from-utopian-Star-Trek-to-absurdist-Douglas-
Adams-e2k0jsj)
