# Billionaires in space and bottling the overview effect

Let’s suppose that seeing the Earth from space genuinely does trigger a
spiritual experience leading to an appreciation of the fragility of life and a
step increase in empathy. Then I propose that we pathologise the syndrome that
going to the Karman Line fixes, and get millions of people cured as soon as
possible – by going up and over, or otherwise.

It’s called the **[overview effect](https://www.nasa.gov/johnson/HWHAP/the-
overview-effect),** a psychological effect that creates "powerful shifts in
the way you think about Earth and life." (That link is a NASA podcast episode
with Frank White who coined the term in 1987.)

Here’s Edgar Mitchell, Apollo 14 astronaut:

You develop an instant global consciousness, a people orientation, an intense
dissatisfaction with the state of the world, and a compulsion to do something
about it. From out there on the moon, international politics looks so petty.
You want to grab a politician by the scruff of the neck and drag him a quarter
of a million miles out and say, “Look at that, you son of a b–.”

After coming back from the Moon in 1971, Mitchell co-founded the [Institute of
Noetic Sciences](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Institute_of_Noetic_Sciences),
researching human potential and parapsychology such as clairvoyance and psi.

So in recent weeks Richard Branson and Jeff Bezos, [silly
billies](/home/2021/06/28/trillies), have been racing to be simultaneously
rich and also riding on their own ships technically into space and back.

Virgin Galactic’s SpaceShipTwo (Branson) and Blue Origin’s New Shepherd 4
(Bezos) each spent a couple minutes in space – according to their own
definitions: 50 miles up for Branson; 62 miles/100 km up for Bezos, the so-
called _Karman line._

(Straight up and down for both. Neither attempted the 17,000 mph sideways
velocity required to enter orbit.)

The semiotics of the crew outfits are fascinating. [Virgin Galactic suits are
straight out of the Marvel Cinematic
Universe](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-57790040) _(BBC
News),_ blue and gold out of a material that looks like some kind of sci-fi
synthetic, textured with dimples and flight booties too. [Blue Origin also
went for blue space onesies](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-
environment-57849364) _(BBC News)_ and I’m guessing there is a legit reason
for this convergent suit design – safety in the case of cabin depressurisation
maybe? Looks like it would be fiddly to pee in any event.

But honestly it looks like astronaut cosplay.

It’s space tourism I know. Both these companies will be selling seats, and I
sincerely hope that customers get to take their suits home with them, mission
patch and all and, I don’t know, wear them to the pub or whatever. I am into
the idea that the fashion concepts explored in these overalls somehow trickle
down into everyday streetwear.

ALSO: both companies are going pretty hard on the overview effect. [For
example, PR from Virgin Galactic.](https://www.space.com/43288-virgin-
galactic-space-travel-overview-effect.html)

Is this just marketing?

Like, are they bigging-up the Earth-from-space perspective shift because that
helps sell seats at $250k a pop… or is there _really_ a profound psychological
effect from those couple of minutes seeing the sky go black and the curve of
the Earth and the weightlessness?

**An aside** about the politics of the thing.

Look, proceduralising access to space is awesome. A real step in the right
direction. The engineering accomplishment alone is awe inspiring.

I’m impressed. I watched the YouTube live streams. Well done to everyone
involved.

However I am increasingly uncomfortable with society’s surplus being directed
by billionaires and not democratically. Deciding whether we spend money on
space or homelessness is a decision for the state and not for the hoarders of
capital. No matter how benevolent they are now, should we be ok with decisions
about the direction of society being made be people just because they are
rich? And how did they get there? As Alexei Sayle said: "Show me a millionaire
and I’ll show you 999,999 people short of a quid."

THAT SAID: the US’s growing private space programme has had heavy state aid
along the way. New Mexico paid for Virgin Galactic’s spaceport; NASA funds the
flights via research contracts. Blue Origin has benefited from NASA
development contracts, though it’s mostly funded directly by Bezos. But Bezos’
wealth comes from Amazon, and Amazon’s warehouse employees are big recipients
of welfare. Perhaps if they were paid properly, the US government wouldn’t
have to support them, but the Bezos couldn’t afford to support Blue Origin. So
there’s a kind of invisible state support going on there too.

What I’m saying is that I would prefer to see both Virgin Galactic and Blue
Origin as a triumph for _smart state investment over many years._

Holding up the billionaires as heroes in these situations is misleading and
tells everyone that something is going on that really isn’t. The success
belongs to everyone. To present it otherwise undermines democracy and
manufactures consent for oligarchy.

**Back to the overview effect,** which should be studied methodically.

Because if the overview effect is real then business leaders and powerful
politicians should be sent into space, asap. It should be a condition of
office or of being a billionaire that you viscerally acknowledge the oneness
of life.

I remember hearing that the breakthrough with Viagra was getting _“erectile
dysfunction”_ in the book of official pathologies, and this seems like a
clever trick [(as previously discussed)](/home/2020/12/23/turpentine).

What pathology does the overview effect cure? Let’s call it _negempathy._

_(Named in honour of the slightly outdated scientific concept
of[negentropy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negentropy), big in the
cybernetics era and also in mid-20th-century sci-fi.)_

Negempathy: the lack of common cause with other life on Earth; the absence of
appreciation that we’re all in it together; a disease of the body politic; the
inability to care.

If people, especially _powerful_ people, can be vaccinated against their
negempathy, then let’s go for it! Line them up at the spaceports! And then
once they’re done, set up a conveyor belt for everyone else: once you hit 16,
bang, you get your four minutes in space.

And you come back down wanting to save the planet.

Having named it, perhaps the mechanically-induced overview effect isn’t the
_only_ inoculation against negempathy. Could there be a chemical cure?

Globally taxpayers and philanthropic organisations have spent billions on
researching and rolling out Covid-19 vaccines. And the pay-off is worth it: it
turns out that 3 billion vaccines, at a cost of $40 each, is worth _$17.4
trillion_ to the global economy, a value of $5,400 each
[(source)](https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2021/03/bigger-
is-better-when-it-comes-to-vaccine-production.html). It’s a huge bargain. So
that justifies all kinds of investment into vaccine capacity acceleration.

Now think of the climate emergency: what is the cost to the global economy of
each month’s delay in setting global carbon reduction targets? It must be
staggering.

Imagine that cost could be reduced, just by buying select members of the
political elite seats on Virgin Galactic and Blue Origin. So let’s do that.

But ALSO let’s find ways of reducing the cost further, and rolling out the
overview effect faster to millions and billions of people.

Maybe psilocybin?

What if a precision-calibrated psychedelic effect could be captured in a test
tube, the Karman Line in a vial, _transcendence,_ the results rolled out in
something like the global vaccination program?

Somebody ought to be researching the heck out of this.
