# How about hyperlocal pandemic forecasting

I’m a big fan of weather forecasts. It’s an incredible feat to describe the
ever-changing multi-variable fluid-dynamical state of the freaking
_atmosphere_ in such simple terms that we can

Amazing.

I’ve just been looking at some stats. [Next day forecasts are 80%
accurate](https://www.countryliving.com/uk/wildlife/countryside/news/a1903/percentage-
weather-forecast-correct/), up from 66% a decade ago. The UK Met Office’s [4
day forecast today is as accurate as the 1 day in
1980](https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/about-us/what/accuracy-and-trust/comparing-
forecast-accuracy).

Barometers: especially good. With their dial running
stormy/rain/change/fair/etc. [See some antique ones
here.](http://www.barometerworld.co.uk/sold_antique.htm) It’s everything you
need to know in a single instrument: e.g. it was originally raining and it is
improving quickly. A vector not a point. Well done barometers!

Sometimes I wish I had a weather app that did the same. Open it, and the
screen would just say “wear the same as you wore yesterday,” or maybe also
wetter/drier/windier.

The app [Dark Sky](https://darksky.net) comes closest to that magical feeling,
although in a different way: its hyperlocal, to-the-minute forecasts aren’t
always accurate, but when it says _“rain stopping in 12 minutes”_ and then, in
12 minutes, the SKIES CLEAR and you can go outside without bothering to take a
hat… it’s a superpower.

I read recently that [weather forecasts are
suffering](https://www.npr.org/sections/coronavirus-live-
updates/2020/04/03/826848818/one-more-coronavirus-problem-accurate-weather-
forecasts) because flights have been cancelled, and aircraft are responsible
for a large amount of the data that goes to feed the simulations:

The European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts reports a 80% drop in
meteorological readings due to cancellations of commercial flights. According
to their study, removing all aircraft data from weather models reduces
accuracy by 15%.

(You might guess that I took the atmospherics module at uni, and meteorology
was my favourite part of geography at school.)

ANYWAY SO HERE’S MY QUESTION:

How about hyperlocal, to-the-minute pandemic forecasts?

The UK govt announced its **COVID Alert Levels** which run from 1-5. [Here
they
are](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/884352/slides_-_11_05_2020.pdf)
[pdf]. e.g.:

Like a barometer, the level takes into account situation _and_ direction of
change _and_ rate of change.

The government _also_ released an equation which has been [roundly
mocked](https://twitter.com/ElectionMapsUK/status/1259610715985457158). Here
it is:

COVID Alert Level = Rate of infection + Number of infections

Which is… fine? I don’t get the mocking. I mean, it communicates exactly the
right information. The alert level goes up if either of the other two numbers
go up. What were they supposed to write? It’s impressive wordsmithing to
convey that entire mental model so concisely.

But what caught my attention was that if the alert level rises, the lockdown
would be once again tightened… **and they said this could happen locally.**

WHICH LED ME TO THINK:

What would it mean to have a giant pandemic simulation running on those
impressive Met Office computers?

AND FURTHERMORE:

Could this pandemic mirror world be used for forecasting?

How many million data points would it need to be fed to forecast

What sensors would be required to feed such a simulation?

How fine could the resolution become?

Could some kind of future _Dark Sky meets Citymapper meets contact tracing_
app say things like…

_“well you’re near London Bridge and the general number of infections is low,
but there’s been an infection wavefront moving up slowly from the south plus,
huh, Tuesday morning it usually gets kinda busy, so between 8-10am in that
area we’re forecasting a COVID Alert Level of 4.3._

_“BUT the surrounding neighbourhood we’re looking at a local alert level of
3.6 and falling,_

_“AND SO,_

_“if you get off the train one stop early and walk the rest of the way to
work, sure you’ll be out in public for 30 minutes longer, but your exposure
overall will still be lower, so that’s your recommended route this morning.”_

**???**

Communicating this might end up looking a bit like
[rads](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rad_(unit)>), the "unit of absorbed
radiation dose."

Maybe your phone could track your location and give you a live exposure number
over the day, like a badge? **It’s 2pm and you’re at 40 co-rads today. We
recommend you leave before rush hour and take this 20 co-rad route home, also
WASH YOUR HANDS.**
