# Apple’s photo scanning and our state of forced collective paranoia

Apple released its plans to [automatically scan phones for child abuse
material](https://www.apple.com/child-safety/) which on the face of it is good
policing – and the response has been loud and angry and calls out the
dangerous slippery slope of surveillance. But I think what is also being
revealed is a particularly 21st century phenomenon, and that is _mass social
paranoia._

The slippy slope argument is not hard to see. The plan is for Apple to
continuously scan photos sent in messages and stored in iCloud, testing them
against a known database of child abuse images, and escalating matching photos
to human review.

But now the mechanism is in place, what else could it be used for? Could the
Chinese government coerce Apple to locate dissidents, by adding certain non-
child-abuse images to the central database? I mean, what are Apple going to do
– not sell phones in China? Or can the GDPR “right to be forgotten” be wielded
to force erasure of (say) unwisely shared nudes? Hard to argue with that, and
Google hides links from search results under GDPR so maybe not such a stretch.
But then why not automate removal of embarrassing photos of celebrities with
expensive lawyers?

The EFF response is far more articulate on the details and "mission creep"
potential of the new system: [Apple’s Plan to “Think Different” About
Encryption Opens a Backdoor to Your Private
Life](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2021/08/apples-plan-think-different-about-
encryption-opens-backdoor-your-private-life).

BUT:

I have a friend who has worked in positions where she can see the global
traffic of child exploitation material, and I’ve spoken with her just a little
bit about this in the past. It is horrific and huge. We need good policing,
that’s my view, and mechanisms to achieve that, and we can debate how that
happens. _(We’re a long way from any answers, but my thoughts on a good
approach are a whole other topic.)_

So there’s a line for society to walk.

And it _really_ doesn’t help that we have to trust a corporation to walk this
line, without democratic accountability.

Yet this isn’t just a privacy debate.

It feels different because the photos are being scanned on-device. The
surveillance is on our phones. And that triggers a whole other kind of
response.

Cory Doctorow, way back in 2002: [My Blog, My Outboard
Brain](https://web.archive.org/web/20020802094408/http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/javascript/2002/01/01/cory.html)
_(O’Reilly):_ "Being deprived of my blog right now would be akin to suffering
extensive brain-damage. Huge swaths of acquired knowledge would simply
vanish."

Clive Thompson, in 2007: [Your Outboard Brain Knows
All](https://www.wired.com/2007/09/st-thompson-3/) _(Wired):_ "This summer,
neuroscientist Ian Robertson polled 3,000 people and found that the younger
ones were less able than their elders to recall standard personal info."

This feels obvious now, but it was new then:

And when he asked them their own phone number, fully one-third of the
youngsters drew a blank. They had to whip out their handsets to look it up.

So smartphones become, somehow, part of the mind.

Cognitive scientist Andy Clark makes the point that the mind doesn’t stop at
the skull. He lays out the _extended mind_ hypothesis in his astoundingly
prescient book [Natural-Born Cyborgs](https://uk.bookshop.org/books/natural-
born-cyborgs-minds-technologies-and-the-future-of-human-
intelligence/9780195177510) (2003). _Highly recommended._

He makes the argument that we don’t just _use_ pen and paper to work out a
sum, but the tool becomes part of our thinking. Information on the web isn’t
just consulted on our phones, but is in a real way part of our memory.

Humans are special precisely because our brains have this ability to side-load
the world into self:

In embracing our hybrid natures, we give up the idea of the mind and the self
as a kind of wafer-thin inner essence, dramatically distinct from all its
physical trappings. In place of this elusive essence, the human person emerges
as a shifting matrix of biological and nonbiological parts. The self, the
mind, and the person are no more to be extracted from that complex matrix than
the smile from the Cheshire Cat.

Phones are part of us.

Scanning the photos on your phone isn’t like steaming open the mail and
peeping inside the envelopes. It’s like rifling through your memory.

And when those memories may at any time be silently observed or removed… even
if it never happens but there is the possibility of it…

Well.

Every culture, big and small, has a feeling that it swims in but is often slow
to put its finger on, like the proverbial fish in the ocean unable to see the
water. That’s my take.

I think in the 70s and 80s that feeling was the end of the world. I was pretty
sure, as a little kid, that by the time I was my age, now, I would be living
in a post-apocalyptic nuclear wasteland. It wasn’t a conviction, it was more
like an unspoken understanding. And goodness knows what that did to us.

Ironically the end of the world _is_ coming, in the shape of the climate
crisis, and I wonder how those of us who grew up taking the Cold War for
granted are coloured by that experience and how it is tainting our response.
We probably feel like the climate crisis, or at least some kind of apocalypse
is inevitable somehow? Or alternatively, that if we wait around for long
enough then the threat will just somehow… recede? Like the way the peril
lifted in the 90s. Dangerous templating for us to have; thank god for the
zoomers.

What’s in the air now?

We swim in paranoia, I think.

We’re always potentially being watched.

RELATED: I ran across [Zizek riffing on Donald
Rumsfeld](https://youtu.be/MXumVxdfbU4) _(YouTube)_ and specifically
developing the concept of **unknown knowns.** Here’s Ted Hunt on Twitter with
a quote/summary:

”.. the main dangers lie in the unknown knowns–the disavowed beliefs,
suppositions and obscene practices we pretend not to know about, even though
they form the background of our public values.” – Slavoj Zizek

So paranoia is like our culture’s current unknown known. That’s where it sits,
somewhere in the social unconscious.

James Bridle’s 2014 work **The Nor** was "an investigation into paranoia,
electromagnetism, and infrastructure."

It’s a sequence of essays telling the story of a participatory, documentary
act: Bridle’s walk across London, photographing every CCTV camera he passed.
SPOILER: It doesn’t end well.

[Here are the essays:](https://jamesbridle.com/works/the-nor)

The sense of being watched is a classic symptom of paranoia, often a sign of
deeper psychosis, or dismissed as illusory. In the mirror city, which exists
at the juncture of the street and CCTV, of bodily space and the
electromagnetic spectrum, one is always being watched. So who’s paranoid now?

And it was this work that really opened my eyes to the pervasive sensation of
surveillance. (Which is why art is vital, right?) Especially because Bridle
makes explicit the role of the _network_ and what that does: the first essay
is titled _All Cameras are Police Cameras._

The camera network today is Instagram, TikTok, other people’s phones. It’s the
pictures taken at parties, previously private spaces, and it’s the acquisition
of the breakthrough facial recognition startup
[Face.com](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Face.com) by Facebook in 2012, and
everything that opened a door to across the industry.

A lot has been said about the
[Panopticon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panopticon), Jeremy Bentham’s 1786
concept of a prison where the prisoners are controlled by the mere
_possibility_ of being observed, and of
[sousveillance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sousveillance): surveillance
from the same level; we watch one-another. That’s what a networked camera in
every pocket leads to.

The debate, over the last 20 years as this has been happening, has been framed
around the loss of privacy and whether that matters: the younger generation
has different privacy expectations to us, that’s one statement; the absolutist
privacy ideals of the EFF are another part of the debate.

(And the responses to this shift are fascinating. For me, the go-to here is
danah boyd’s work, and I’ve recently been diving into [her work on networked
privacy](https://www.danah.org/papers/talks/2011/PDF2011.html) from the early
2010s, and the sophisticated ways that teens are finding control and agency in
this world.)

_But how does it feel?_

It feels like paranoia. You don’t know how the image of you has spread, or
your words passed on. You don’t know how it will be interpreted; you don’t
know if you’re going to wake up one morning in the middle of a context
collapse Twitter pile-on – or be fine as normal – or arrested by the police.

ASIDE, just to say that Covid-19 is a very 2020s disease, very paranoid.

Unlike the Blitz in London in the Second World War where the risk was
external, and everyone has to pull together. (I reference this simply because
it’s the event which is also mentioned here in the UK whenever there’s a new
national crisis.) Everyone _could_ pull together because everyone could be
trusted. All in the same boat.

But with Covid…

Anyone you meet may be infectious. Or not. There’s a risk in every interaction
that, later, you find out they have “betrayed” you. Further, there’s a risk
that you, yourself, may have Covid. You may be spreading it, infecting your
neighbours, your parents – you can unknowingly betray yourself.

So there’s this questioning of self and one-another, and we’ve responded with
surveillance and sousveillance: we continuously monitor one-another with
contact tracing apps, ourselves with self-administered tests. We’re reminded
to be suspicious.

This uncertainty about self and other is so similar to social media. When you
talk to people online, are they really people or are they bots? Are they
stealing your data? Have you exposed yourself, given yourself away? Are you,
yourself, tainted – have you fallen into a Facebook rabbit hole and been
radicalised… how would you know? Is there a home-administered lateral flow
test for extremism?

I am _not_ saying that the Covid response is inappropriate.

But what I am saying is that the mutual suspicion and monitoring is (looking
at it with this particular framing) a forced paranoid state, which is very in
keeping with social media and networked technology.

And it would be interesting to consider how we would have tackled Covid if we
had instead a different dominant social scaffolding to conceptualise “threat,”
for example if we had still been in the tail end of the Cold War.

Credit to the current generation, they are responding to this paranoid milieu
of the 2010s/2020s and developing new language to point at it and discuss it.

The emergence of the term _gaslighting_ has been a joy to see: this new
ability to discern when memory is being undermined for the purposes of
manipulation and control – well, that’s a word we all needed and thank you.

Jumping to [a definition](https://www.verywellmind.com/is-someone-gaslighting-
you-4147470) for a second:

Gaslighting is a technique that undermines your entire perception of reality.
When someone is gaslighting you, you often second-guess yourself, your
memories, and your perceptions.

Let me bring this back to Apple, and why I think the initial response to their
child abuse material scanning announcement has been so angry and so strong.

Our phones aren’t computers. They are our outboard brains. Our photos aren’t
simply stored; they are part of our memory.

We live in a state of forced paranoia, developed over the last almost twenty
years. We don’t know who’s watching or what will be done with this. But we’ve
found accommodations. We’ve managed. We have new language to talk about it.

Except now somebody _is_ proposing to look at our memories. We won’t feel
anything; we won’t hear anything; probably nothing will happen. We all know
from previous experiences with algorithms that misinterpretations will happen.
And of course there are human monitors involved too, which means we have to
consider, at some level, what they will think of us. So now we have to police
ourselves, just in case we take a photo of - have a memory of - happen to
think the wrong thing.

And if somebody else is now inside your memories, can you be sure that they’re
not being edited? Is gaslighting occuring with these most personal of devices?
Even if it never happens… that’s the lesson of the Panopticon, the mere
possibility is enough to affect behaviour.

What the word for paranoia when it’s true?

Covid, phone surveillance, social media, mass paranoia – all of these are of a
type and in resonance; nonlinear sympathetic consequences are kicking off all
over the place.

I don’t know what should be done, what the rights and wrongs are here.

But I wanted to make the connection.
