# Thinking about design pathfinding, which is a bit inside-baseball but forgive me

I ran across **design pathfinding,** a new-to-me phrase, so I’ve been reading
up.

…and I can’t find much, except this, about _pathfinding research._

Pathfinding research is the work that enables us to peek around corners and
shine light on new pathways.

As it fits with other types of research (think of this in the context of, say,
AI research about text synthesis, or research into VR interactions):

Strategic research identifies longer-term aims or interests and means of
achieving them. Foundational research illuminates the perceptions, needs,
motivations, and/or pain points of the people you’re building for, yielding
evergreen insights. To perform pathfinding research is to leverage both of
these core components, triangulate data sources both within and outside your
company, _and find a lighthouse in the distance to steer your shipmates
toward._

Gray is at Meta, which figures, because the two people who (independently)
said _“design pathfinding”_ to me are both also from Meta.

Gray doesn’t mention design but does mention this: "Cultivating visibility."

Experiment with different versions of decks that speak to different audiences.
Try videos, mini museums, trivia, workshops, and other creative ways to get
others engaged in the insights.

I like this! A very design way of thinking.

Pathfinding, per Gray, comes across as an approach which is orchestrated
around external outcomes: not the local and internal _“we learnt X”_ but
instead _“as a consequence the organisation did X rather than Y.”_

So that’s pathfinding research. From there I think I can build a bridge to
design pathfinding?

Now there are all kinds of design methods for invention. Design fiction,
prototyping, [thinking through making](/home/2006/07/28/about_making_things)…

…and part of an invention _project,_ if it is to be effective, is a focus on
communication, creating change, informing strategy etc.

_(The methods I mention are all very material-first. There are user-first
methods too of course and of course you use both. Though I feel like user-
first approaches are more closely allied to the “scouting” function of a
product org; different methods for different stages.)_

What grabs my attention about design pathfinding, as far as I understand it,
is that the material-first design tools of artefacts, fiction, making, etc are
all potentially employed, but also direction-setting and influence are goals
and part of the conversation from day 1. It’s not an optional extra.

There is an intention to reveal a new product opportunity _and make it
compelling for others,_ or to uncover a research need _and create the desire
to get there,_ or to show a design route as right or wrong _and as a
consequence advocate for the next steps of investment of time and resources._

Now that’s something that those of us who have been involved in design and
invention would nod at impatiently, like, _obviously, forever,_ so what’s
handy is that there is a name for it. Not a neutral or inward-looking name
like “design research” but a name that foregrounds the wider function and
frames design as a journey.

Making _plus_ building conviction, as a way to invent. I could align myself
with that.

So I’m into this as an approach. Or at least as a label because I’m guessing
what it means. Is “design pathfinding” a term with currency outside Meta? Is
there anything else I should read?
