# Peak Attention and the DuPont Equation

I keep coming back to this article [A Brief History of the Corporation: 1600
to 2100](http://www.ribbonfarm.com/2011/06/08/a-brief-history-of-the-
corporation-1600-to-2100/) (which I first read back in [Week
315](http://berglondon.com/blog/2011/06/21/week-315/)), in particular the
section "Schumpeterian Growth and the Industrial Economy (1800-2000)" which is
about (and I quote) "_THE COLONIZATION OF TIME_" which I have written in caps
and underlined because it is meant to be said out loud like this:

The COLON IIZ AAAATION OF TIIIIIME.

_Per capita productivity is about efficient use of human time._ But time,
unlike space, is not a collective and objective dimension of human experience.
It is a private and subjective one. Two people cannot own the same piece of
land, but they can own the same piece of time. To own space, you control it by
force of arms. To own time is to own attention. To own attention, it must
first be freed up, one individual stream of consciousness at a time.

The Schumpeterian corporation was about colonizing individual minds. Ideas
powered by essentially limitless fossil-fuel energy allowed it to actually
pull it off.

Aaaaand:

The equation was simple: energy and ideas turned into products and services
could be used to buy time. Specifically, energy and ideas could be used to
shrink autonomously-owned individual time and grow a space of corporate-owned
time, to be divided between production and consumption. Two phrases were
invented to name the phenomenon: _productivity_ meant shrinking autonomously-
owned time. _Increased standard of living_ through _time-saving_ devices
became code for the fact that the “freed up” time through “labor saving”
devices was actually the _de facto_ property of corporations.

Gosh, feels like the internet doesn’t it.

For the same two centuries it seemed like time/attention reserves could be
endlessly mined. New pockets of attention could always be discovered,
colonized and turned into wealth.

Then the Internet happened, and we discovered the ability to mine time as fast
as it could be discovered in hidden pockets of attention. And we discovered
limits.

And suddenly a new peak started to loom: Peak Attention.

Sidebar: There’s something I faintly remember reading in [Lefebvre, Love &
Struggle: Spatial
Dialectics](http://www.ualberta.ca/~cjscopy/reviews/lefebvre.html) by Rob
Shields. It’s so faint I’m not sure I’m remembering it correctly. But I
_think_ it was something about Henri Lefebvre writing in post-war France about
home automation - washing machines and the like - and seeing it as a turning
inwards of the forces of colonisation: France was no longer colonising other
countries and instead was eating itself in a [colonisation of everyday
life.](http://www.purselipsquarejaw.org/2005/02/in-favour-of-boredom.php)
Which gives me an image of a country-body made from rapacious corporations,
starved after being cut off from their food of the various European empires,
digesting its own body of workers and consumers, burning the healthy fat
pockets of attention and boredom and creating the jittery, never at rest,
meth-addled population we have today.

One final thing from [A Brief History of the
Corporation](http://www.ribbonfarm.com/2011/06/08/a-brief-history-of-the-
corporation-1600-to-2100/) (READ IT), this line: "I am not sure who first came
up with the term Peak Attention, but the analogy to Peak Oil is surprisingly
precise. It has its critics, but I think the model is basically correct." I
think I might have said it first,
[here](http://interconnected.org/home/2008/01/14/the_fancy_legged_man) and
[here.](http://berglondon.com/talks/movement/?slide=15) But who knows, it
probably wasn’t me.

_Return on Equity_

And the thing for me is I like to trace the paths between abstraction and
acts. For example, at work we’ve recently been doing some consultancy with a
company on new product development, and part of the work (I encourage it to be
part of the work) is to consider not just new concepts, but how to ensure new
concepts are _adopted._ That means understanding the business, the audience,
route to market, etc, but also the personality of the organisation: what will
work well in the organisation, and what will the organisation resist?

The personality of an organisation is embodied in its structure (which encodes
both who socialises with who, which is my best model for how understanding and
influence is transmitted, and the values and worldview of its management), and
also its myths: what is its origin (this will be held up as a triumph to
mimic); what examples does it use as patterns to mimic or run away from?

So I like to be able to simultaneously speak about the personality of an
organisation (the abstraction) and how that abstraction manifests in action –
that is, the behaviours of individuals and much smaller groups. This is my
route to figuring out how to _change_ an organisation… and honestly, getting
an organisation to produce a new product or support a new concept is always
going to involve change, because if the organisation didn’t need to change
then it would already be doing whatever we’ve been brought in to help with.

One of the things that has intrigued me is how the pursuit of profit by a
corporation - the concept of which is bizarre, by the way, that “pursuit” is a
something that can be _done_ by a “corporation,” a thing/idea partially
comprising but also _transcendent_ from the humans who _can_ actually pursue -
anyway, how the pursuit of profit by a corporation leads to the very many (but
not all) frankly shitty organisations that exist in the world today,
organisations which

Intrigued that is until I read [End the Religion of Return on
Equity](http://blogs.hbr.org/hbr/meyer-kirby/2011/10/can-we-end-the-religion-
of-roe.html) in the _Harvard Business Review_ which puts the blame firmly at
the feet of a human named Donaldson Brown, of the company DuPont, in 1917:

A hundred years ago, the focus on squeezing every drop of return out of equity
capital made great sense. …

The ability to do that rose to a new level in 1917, when General Motors was in
financial difficulty and DuPont took a major position in the company. (GM
represented an important channel for Dupont’s lacquer, artificial leather, and
other products, and Pierre du Pont was on GM’s Board.) DuPont sent Donaldson
Brown, a promising engineer-turned-finance staffer, to Detroit to sort things
out, and sort them out he did.

Brown noted a simple fact: _Return on equity can be broken down into a three-
part equation. It is logically the product of return on sales times the ratio
of sales to assets times the ratio of assets to equity._ By parsing ROE into
the DuPont Equation (very rapidly to become a business school mainstay), he
provided the basis for organizations divided into functions with their own
objectives. He reasoned that _if marketers worked on maximizing return on
sales, production managers were rewarded for the sales they squeezed out of
their physical plant, and finance managers focused on minimizing the amount of
equity capital they needed, ROE would take care of itself._

Thus Brown not only sowed the seeds of the today’s hated silos, he also set
three “runaways” in motion. That is to say, he created objectives with such
strong feedback loops that they were pursued single-mindedly, even to
unhealthy excess.

The [DuPont Equation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DuPont_analysis).

Bang! Read that again. Each of the three components of the equation is a top-
level division of the company, as separately run as it is possible to do, with
different goals, requiring a different mentality from the people in the
divisions.

Again: Each ratio in an equation written by a man named Donaldson Brown in
1917 has become separated into different divisions in org charts of
corporations almost 100 years later.

No wonder some corporations can feel so schizophrenic.

The article makes it clear…

In their pursuit of margin, marketers sought market power even to the point of
monopoly, requiring antitrust laws to cry stop at the last moment of the end
game. Similarly, production engineers treated their factories royally and
their labor as expendable, until unions and labor laws intervened. Financial
managers, supported by their bankers, increased their debt-to-equity ratios
until capital requirements were imposed-oops, we mean until there was a
catastrophic financial crash and a depression.

…and then it continues into speculating about a new formation for the DuPont
Equation. It’s worth your time.

_How these ideas of Peak Attention and the DuPont Equation are linked_

Don’t know, still thinking about that.
