# Tinkering with hyperlinks

Hyperlinks should look different if it’s busy at the other end. Like: maybe
they should be noisy, or glow, or have a yellow halo that gets bigger and
bigger.

I made a teeny software sketch: [watch a video](/more/2023/02/multiplayer-
sally-1.mp4) _(30s)._

Each of the “web pages” _(they’re just pretend)_ has the standard avatar bar
across the top, like Google Docs or Figma. The more people there are at the
destination, the bigger the hyperlink halo.

ALSO: when you hover over the link, you appear in that avatar bar too,
peeping. Everyone in the room can tell you’re looking in!

_([I also posted this movie on
Twitter](https://twitter.com/genmon/status/1628773303618879488), if you want
to comment.)_

Look, this isn’t a very impressive sketch. You know that, I know that.

BUT.

I wrote a lot about the web going social and multiplayer last year ([here’s a
map of my posts](/home/2022/11/09/map)). The architectural patterns of
approach! How presence lingers! How attention works!

Not to mention that once you have a team on a webpage, you _also_ have a
runtime for AI teammates – NPCs.

Those would be fun interactions to explore.

And I think by making.

So this is the beginning of my own little sandbox. Gotta start somewhere!

And who knows what I’ll learn by getting my hands dirty, or how I’ll think
about recombining the pieces.

_Why?_

There’s a kind of **material exploration** that I’m embarking on, I guess?
Trying to sculpt something, seeing how it feels, challenging my
preconceptions, learning the grain of the material of the multiplayer web…
educating my opinions.

Material exploration has been so core to my process for so long that I forget
to talk about it, often; forget to even deploy it sometimes.

That’s part of it.

ALSO, #2: I am enamoured of a community which has a full-blown **scenius**
going on.

I’ll link to a bunch of Twitter feeds here because that’s where the action is:
startups like [The Browser Company](https://twitter.com/browsercompany) (with
Arc), tldraw via their founder [Steve Ruiz](https://twitter.com/steveruizok),
and [Fermat](https://twitter.com/fermat_ws) are working and experimenting with
software in the open, sharing often wild GIFs of prototype interactions as
they go. [Omar Rizwan](https://twitter.com/rsnous) regular shares software
thought bullets (and made the experimental browser extension
[TabFS](https://omar.website/tabfs/)); continuous visual experiments by
[Morten Just](https://twitter.com/mortenjust); _so many more people who aren’t
at the top of my timeline right this minute;_ the ENTIRE [Future of
Coding](https://futureofcoding.org) community on Slack…

My Twitter timeline is full of their energy, and I am like: _I want in on
this._

“Scenius” is Brian Eno’s term meaning _communal genius_ and [last time I
talked about it](/home/2020/08/18/filtered_for_small_groups) (2020) I quoted
some of the essential qualities. Including: "mutual appreciation (scenius as
peer pressure)" – or to put it another way, "a healthy jealousy without envy"
– competitive collaboration!

So that’s another part of why I’m sketching, I think, because I want to be
part of that whole thing. I believe firmly that if you want to be part of
something, do not arrive with empty hands (somehow).

Anyway. Tinkering. That’s where a bunch of my time is going rn.
