# The feeling of percolating on stubborn problems

I wonder what’s going on in my head while I’m trying to figure out a problem.

I’ve been in venture building and strategy for a few months (the gig wraps up
at the end of this month). Working to understand whole new-to-me sectors, and
disruption dynamics, and client capabilities, all well enough to figure out
good entry points.

Periodically, everything gets stuck in my head. I can’t write, can’t make
slides, and I can barely articulate what’s interesting about the area. I can
plod through a description, but the “why” and “what for” escapes me, and
questions leave me stumped.

This lasts for 2 or 3 days. During which time it’s hard to focus on other
tasks, I’m mildly short tempered, my to-do list goes untended, etc. Nothing
major, just like there’s something occupying 30% of my CPU, if you know what I
mean? And then…

Out of nowhere, the entire thing pops into my head. The key goals, a
structured articulation of the market and how it’s evolving, recommended next
steps, and all in the form of a top-to-bottom narrative. The deck outline
comes out of my hands like automatic writing.

It’s not perfect, obviously. It gets presented, tweaked, reordered… It
improves mainly through attempting to present it, and getting feedback through
conversation. Until the point comes that it’s too brittle: I can see that it’s
broken, but I can’t see how to incorporate obviously correct feedback. That’s
the point that this deck (or mental model, or narrative) is redundant and it’s
time to move onto the next stage, whatever that is.

But what’s going on in that 2 days?

What is this “background processing” feeling?

How come it’s a black box?

Other people [I’ve
asked](https://twitter.com/genmon/status/1331893300144590850) share this. But
what’s happening, brain-wise?

Baffling.

It’s like this for every project I’ve ever worked on.

_(The first time I specifically remember this happening was figuring out an
approach to a tricky differentiation in a physics problem that had been
bothering me. The whole solution popped into my head unbidden on the dance
floor at Downtown Manhattan on George St.)_

There are ways to move things along. Talking helps. Going back to first
principles helps: asking why, researching, writing down what I know in the
plainest possible language. Writing down what I _don’t_ know works. For really
stubborn problems: running; hot showers.

But still the feeling of percolation. Like there’s a sub-mind allocated to the
problem, one that has access to everything I know yet sits outside my personal
experience of self, and all I can do - all I _need_ to do - is wait.
