# Personal software vs factory-produced software

Rev Dan Catt, technologist and [pen plotter
artist](https://www.instagram.com/revdancatt/), recently posted about the
tools he’s built to run his art business: [Making all the
Things](https://revdancatt.com/weeknotes/2020/06/14/making-all-the-things).

Like, there’s web-based tool that he’s built - just for him - to remind him
about popping stuff in the post to people.

The copy is delightful because it doesn’t have that generic second person
thing that most apps do: _Your_ Music, _Your_ Photos, etc. INSTEAD, the site
copy is all in the first person:

"When and where to send cards & letters: Here’s where I keep all the
information I need to get stuff sent off smartish."

The copy is from Catt’s **Correspondance Tracker.** It’s mostly as you’d
expect: forms and buttons and checkboxes and headers, e.g.: "When stuff was
sent." Here’s the explanatory text that follows:

This is when I sent letters or cards, so when I go “Oh when did I send that
letter?” I can see here

The two checkboxes can help if I sent something with tracking, once I’ve
checked it’s arrived I can mark it off.

It’s like when you write yourself a post-it and leave it in a box file of
paperwork that you know you’ll open again in a year and want to know what’s
going on…

Robin Sloan put it like this: [An app can be a home-cooked
meal.](https://www.robinsloan.com/notes/home-cooked-app/)

He created a video messaging app that works a bit like Snapchat, only super
simple, and for use by only four people: his family.

And here’s Russell Davies’ [Bikemap
project](https://russelldavies.typepad.com/planning/2011/04/homesense-
bikemap.html) (2011) which is a physical, printed out map of his neighbourhood
(from Google Maps?), with little LEDs poking through where there are bike-
share stations. They light up when there are bikes available.

I love writing little bits of automation just for me. I’ve made a Shortcut or
two on my iPhone. I’m happy enough writing an ad hoc script to go through a
bunch of files for me, or to generate the numbers I need to plug into my
accounts once a month. Ok.

But _these_ examples are different…

I wonder what qualities mean that they feel like proper software?

They’re packaged. They don’t feel temporary. If you accidentally deleted the
icon, you could re-install it.

There’s just the right amount of design and copy.

These examples don’t seem like they’re “inside” someone else’s platform, like
a tool written in a spreadsheet does.

They live shoulder-to-shoulder with “bought from the store” apps, in the same
browser as websites with padlock icons like google.com, and on shelves next to
mass-produced products.

There’s an equivalence between personal software and factory-produced
software, here.

I wonder what modern computing would look like, if it was focused on making
that equivalence easier.
