# Formative experiences of read-write science

Neutrinos are tiny and everywhere. The neutrino family makes up three of the
dozen fundamental particles of matter in the Standard Model. They’re made in
nuclear reactions.

Locally that’s the Sun. The [solar neutrino
flux](http://timeblimp.com/?page_id=1033) is "about 65 billion neutrinos,
passing through just one square centimeter of area on earth, every second."

(So look at your hand. Imagine you can see them.)

Neutrinos barely interact with matter. A neutrino could pass through [3000
light years of human meat](http://timeblimp.com/?page_id=1038) before hitting
anything. (Now imagine _that)._

So they’re hard to detect.

Neutrinos didn’t have mass and [then they
did](https://physicsworld.com/a/neutrino-mass-discovered/).

Back in my physics undergrad I remember sitting in a lecture hall and being
told to update our photocopied handouts because neutrino mass had been
discovered over the summer.

_(That link above is to Physics World, July 1998)._

An experience like that absolutely changes your view about what science is.

The excitement in the room!

To edit printed notes by hand like that – you internalise this picture of
science as a living breathing edifice, not distant and immutable. The idea
that physics is a giant wikipedia becomes normal in your head.

Three other similar formative moments also from my undergrad, all previously
discussed:

Often when I read people talking about science, I feel like they’re talking
about something which isn’t this. I don’t recognise that unapproachable
unitary authority, that something _other._ By luck and privilege and a bit of
choice, my personal picture of science isn’t that. It’s malleable, contested,
read-write not read-only.

One of my toddler’s first experience of capital-A Art was drawing on the
floor.

In the summer of 2021, the giant central space of Tate Modern, the Turbine
Hall, was taken over by [Mega Please Draw
Freely](https://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/uniqlo-tate-play/mega-
please-draw-freely) by Ei Arakawa. The entire floor became a whiteboard; kids
who entered were given bold wax crayons.

By the time we went the floor was a colossal tapestry of 10,000 colourful
drawings – by kids, so nothing felt out of reach or like it couldn’t be
replicated. We went back a few times, taking an hour or so to draw and to
look.

So, for her, a gallery isn’t a place you go and see. Her template is that it’s
a place you go and see and simultaneously a place you leave your mark for
others to see.

What a way for art to imprint on my little girl!

Gaudi’s cathedral [has been under construction since
1882](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/history/article/151105-gaudi-sagrada-
familia-barcelona-final-stage-construction). So residents of Barcelona can see
it grow and embellish in front of their eyes. If you want you can dedicate
your life to it too: I highly recommend this [short movie about the Japanese
sculptor Etsuro Sotoo](https://kottke.org/20/07/the-sculptor-tasked-with-
completing-gaudis-sagrada-familia).

Imagine what it does to your view of infrastructure, seemingly set in stone,
and institutions - even one as eternal as the church - if they grow in front
of our eyes and because of OUR HANDS.

Maybe we’ve lost something by not having a grassroots cathedral project in
every city.

I wonder what the absolute smallest most certain way would be to give this
read-write formative experience to everyone, for science, for infrastructure,
for institutions and all the rest.

What triggered this anecdote was Tom Carden on Twitter who said this:

Every popular science book should come with a registration card so you can be
part of the mass recall when science advances.

…and maybe that’s it?
