# The unbearable lightness of my pockets

I replaced my wallet and now I’m concerned that I’ve over-optimised my pockets
and I’ll mistakenly lock myself out of my own life.

I normally carry a regular wallet but can’t remember when I last used it for
anything other than (a) coffee shop loyalty cards and (b) a bulky CVC store. I
no longer carry cash.

So yesterday I replaced it with one of those cardholders that magnetically
attaches to the back of my phone, relegating almost all the physical stuff to
a pot on my desk.

I also carry half a keyring – the other half has my car keys and I only join
the two halves when I’m driving.

5,000 years ago:

The oldest proof (so far) of a human sporting a pocket-like feature was a
mummified fellow found frozen in the alps in 1991. Otzi or “Iceman”, as he is
now known, is thought to have lived around 3,300 BCE. At 5,300 years old
Otzi’s was found to be a perfectly preserved and clothed specimen of the
ancient world. Otzi had held his plethora of secrets well, as enthusiastic
researchers were to discover. One of the most interesting items Otzi was
wearing, was a pouch that was sewn to his belt. The contents of his pouch held
a cache of useful items including; _a scraper, drill, flint flake, bone awl,
and a bit of dried fungus._

(Dried fungus?)

That essay is an illuminating read on the long history of women, pockets, and
control:

Really fascinating. Go read!

A symbol of liberation. But they also weigh you down, right?

Shorts weather means I want to economise re grams in pockets.

So I no longer carry a ton of plastic cards – I use Apple Pay and carry a
single backup card.

I’ve considered whether I would also stop carrying my keys, replacing them
with NFC versions, and I guess the answer is _probably_ but I would also need
a mechanical backup.

The question for me is _not:_ what do I do incase my phone runs out of
battery.

The question is instead: how do I get back up and running if I lose what’s in
my pockets.

FOR EXAMPLE:

Not too long ago I reinstalled a bunch of my electronics at the same time and
got into a situation where, to get back into my account, I needed a 2-factor-
authentication security code that I could receive on any of my existing
devices. Which were all currently in the same boat.

And without being logged into my main account, I wouldn’t be able to access my
password manager, so I would be locked out of all my _other_ internet accounts
too. Including email, which means I wouldn’t be able to prove my identity,
etc.

(Yes this is what recovery codes are for.)

I can’t remember what I did - I think I found an old device that was still
signed in and generated a 2FA code on that - but it gave me a scare.

The analogy is a Black Start.

Power stations take power to run. So if the electric grid goes down, maybe a
solar magnetic storm (we’re due one) and the power station goes offline too,
how do you restart it?

Normally, the electric power used within the plant is provided by the
station’s own generators. If all of the plant’s main generators are shut down,
station service power is provided by drawing power from the grid through the
plant’s transmission line. However, during a wide-area outage, off-site power
from the grid is not available. In the absence of grid power, a so-called
black start needs to be performed to bootstrap the power grid into operation.

To provide a black start, some power stations have small diesel generators,
normally called the black start diesel generator (BSDG), which can be used to
start larger generators (of several megawatts capacity), which in turn can be
used to start the main power station generators.

Regionally some stations are nominated as black-start sources for entire
grids. Something to consider if you’re ever in the situation of designing a
complex system and considering how to bootstrap from worst case scenarios.

AND SO:

Let’s say I lose all my stuff and my devices need a full 2FA sign-in: how do I
black start and ladder my way back up Maslow’s hierarchy - house, money for
food, communication, Twitter - with just what’s in my head?

There’s a lot of complexity in the security that comes with tech. By reducing
the independent moving parts and consolidating to, say, my phone, which is
protected behind a code and Face ID, I’m gaining in object count efficiency
but increasing in complex interrelations. What if getting access to cash means
needing access to my phone means needing access to the recovery codes in my
house which means needing access to cash to pay a locksmith which means
needing to my password manager means access to my phone, etc?

(It nearly happened once: we were burgled and I was able to bootstrap back
from a phonecall to the credit card company to a locksmith, then from an old
laptop to recovering the stolen one. It took a few days. But that was before
2FA etc. It would be harder now.)

What terrifies me is accidentally getting stuck in a circular dependency.
Actually circular dependencies are not hugely tricky to spot – what concerns
me more is a subtle lockout. I don’t feel like I have the capacity to generate
a dependency graph on the build sequence of my own life. How many seemingly
disconnected breakdowns sit between life today and me living on the street,
desperately trying to remember random recovery phrase syllables? I feel like
this is something, with their focus on multitools and nice pens, neglected by
the [everyday carry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Everyday_carry) folks. The
pocket-sized identity black start device.

Long story short, changing my wallet was quite the psychological moment.

Generally all of this is connected to my [anxiety about optimisation through
complexity](/home/2021/02/12/optimisation). Novel feelings of the 2020s. Or
maybe it’s not so new. Maybe Otzi’s dried fungus five thousand years ago had
some kind of black start function too. Who knows.
