# Poker, blacksmithery, and other activities that teach a way to see the world

I don’t really play poker but I enjoy reading about it. It provides some
fascinating strategic perspectives.

From this article about [poker and artificial
intelligence](https://singularityhub.com/2020/08/07/the-deck-is-not-rigged-
poker-and-the-limits-of-ai/):

There’s a concept in game theory known as the _trembling hand:_ There are
branches of the game tree that, under an optimal strategy, one should
theoretically never get to; but with some probability, your all-too-human
opponent’s hand trembles, they take a wrong action, and you’re suddenly in a
totally unmapped part of the game.

Stay in the game, even though you’re in a losing position, because something
might turn up.

In particular your opponent is likely, at some point, to make an unforced
error (that’s the tennis term). Some politicians seem particularly good at
this. And it works! More effectively than I would have imagined.

I wonder how players differentiate between when to stubbornly keep playing,
and when to fold. With statistics I guess. The benefit of a game you can play
many times.

Annie Duke is a former pro poker player, and here she is in conversation with
Tyler Cowen, economist:

It’s mainly about _“thinking probabilistically”_ and there’s a fascinating
section titled **On how poker players would think about public policy.**

My suspicion is that if only the top 500 poker players voted, people would be
thinking a lot more about edge cases – where things could go wrong, for sure,
because poker players just are obsessed with that. I think that there would be
more long-termism as opposed to short-termism, again, because you have to be
obsessed with that as a concept. I think that people would be thinking about
“What are the unintended consequences? How does this look?”

Another thing that’s really important that poker players think about is, “If I
put this policy in that looks like it’s awesome, how can someone come in and
find the cracks in it so that it can turn into something bad?”

I mean, I don’t know whether these strategies work in life generally: play the
game many times; protect your downside; keep going longer than anyone else.
But interesting to think about what is transferable and what isn’t.

When I [talked about bonsai recently](/home/2021/03/11/filtered_for_bonsai), I
suggested that "I kinda want every child to be given one of these at the
beginning of school" – and it was this reason, because of what it teaches you.

My friend [George Walkley](https://www.georgewalkley.com) got in touch to make
the connection to CEOs. He said, "There’s a strand of management research on
how hobbies of CEOs correlate with org performance-classic examples are
flying, skydiving which are about high skill, calculated risks." – and pointed
me at a paper on that topic:

This study analyzes the relation between chief executive officer (CEO)
personal risk-taking, corporate risk-taking, and total firm risk. _We find
evidence that CEOs who possess private pilot licenses (our proxy for personal
risk-taking) are associated with riskier firms._ Firms led by pilot CEOs have
higher equity return volatility …

Amazing! Could you making money knowing that a portfolio of companies was
exclusively run by pilots?

[Then George
suggested](https://twitter.com/walkley/status/1370085526049542144?s=20)
cultivating long-term thinking for CEOs deliberately. It would be "highly
desirable in context of long term challenges like decarbonizing. Give a bonsai
to every first year Harvard Business School student…"

I think it’s a really good question:

What hobbies could I take up to build up my muscles around abstract thinking,
or team dynamics, or risk tolerance, etc? If you wanted to educate excellent
startup founders, or to foster wonderful families and friends, what games in
particular would you have them play at school?

I’m obsessed with how roles in society and individual people find each other,
and how personalities match what we do. But I think we often think about it as
culture – like “yuppies” in the 80s that had a particular culture in finance,
or sometimes we think about the personality type as a requirement to do the
job. Like surgeons have to have a certain kind of attitude because it is very,
very weird on a deep human level to cut into people.

But maybe all that’s required from the personality is a predisposition, and
it’s the actual practice, the _ten thousand hours spent_ interacting with
money, or with scalpels, or with computer code that develops a particular
temperament.

So it fascinates me how you learn almost by osmosis from the non-humans you
spend time with, and I use that to cover living non-humans (yeasts, sheep) but
also material, like iron, and like spreadsheets. And I’m curious about how the
two - humans and the other - form a “culture” of accepted norms.

Like, the colloidal culture of the blacksmith and the iron makes for a
taciturn world where words are rare, but deftly spoken and with gruff
precision.

Because if you spend your days swinging a hammer at hot metal, and every
strike is effortful and has to count, then how would you _not_ take that
understanding of the world into your personal relationships and politics even
once you’ve finished for the day?

Has anyone looked at this?

How humans and non-living material become peers in culture formation, neither
preceding the other?

I know a founder who is a free climber, and once I discovered that I was like
– oh ok, now it all makes sense.

He also plays chess. Which _also_ makes sense.

ASIDE:

Kirsan Ilyumzhinov was president of FIDE (chess’ main international governing
body) from 1995 to 2018.

He is on record as believing that chess was brought to us by
extraterrestrials: "I do, indeed, consider chess a gift from extraterrestrial
civilizations." (From an interview in the _New York Times._)

Also: "He has claimed on many occasions that in 1997 he was taken by aliens to
a spaceship, where he chatted with them before returning to Earth."

There are [many smart people who believe in
extraterrestrials](/home/2021/01/18/ufos).

Also: "He then explains why he believes sweetcorn was brought to Earth by a
different civilization."

[Source.](https://www.chesshistory.com/winter/extra/ilyumzhinov.html)

Sweetcorn!
