# On the possibility of a dolphin pope

I was looking through this [gallery of
popemobiles](https://edition.cnn.com/2013/03/12/europe/gallery/popemobiles/index.html)
and it occurred to me that, with the transparent, upright, contained tank,
this form is ideally shaped to transport a future aquatic pope. Let’s say, a
dolphin.

What are the obstacles to cetacean papacy?

The pope is the bishop of Rome and, in Catholicism, only men may be bishops.
(Though Mary, of course, is fundamental to the church). There’s a quote from
Pope Francis on the Wikipedia page [about the ordination of
women](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ordination_of_women_and_the_Catholic_Church)
which I love simply for the language:

In Catholic ecclesiology there are two dimensions to think about… The Petrine
dimension, which is from the Apostle Peter, and the Apostolic College, which
is the pastoral activity of the bishops, as well as the Marian dimension,
which is the feminine dimension of the Church.

So female dolphins are probably excluded from elevation.

Being non-human may prove another hurdle. Dolphins are animals, so their
capacity will be questioned. But if we take a hypothetical extraterrestrial of
human-equivalent sentience, even they may not be admitted to the church:

If aliens exist, they may be a different life form that does not need Christ’s
redemption, the Vatican’s chief astronomer said. …

“God became man in Jesus in order to save us. So if there are also other
intelligent beings, it’s not a given that they need redemption. They might
have remained in full friendship with their creator,” he said.

So let’s say we were to limit ourselves to male dolphins, even if we then
determined that dolphins were capable of reciting scripture (or whatever our
definition of sentience is), they may be still disqualified for not being in
need of redemption.

Some other faiths allow for a greater divergence between leaders and
followers. In Sikhism, after a lineage of 10 humans, the title of Guru was
passed to the community itself ([as previously
discussed](/home/2015/03/23/filtered)).

And more generally, away from the idea of leadership and thinking about the
operations of worship, there are already [some robots that perform religious
rituals](https://www.vox.com/future-perfect/2019/9/9/20851753/ai-religion-
robot-priest-mindar-buddhism-christianity) (in _Vox_):

In hospice settings, elderly Buddhists who don’t have people on hand to recite
prayers on their behalf will use devices known as nianfo ji – small machines
about the size of an iPhone, which recite the name of the Buddha endlessly.

And:

In 2017, Indians rolled out a robot that performs the Hindu aarti ritual,
which involves moving a light round and round in front of a deity.

And:

For years now, people who can’t afford to pay a human priest to perform a
funeral have had the option to pay a robot named Pepper to do it at a much
cheaper rate.

Also, from that same Vox article, a comment from Ilya Delio, "a Franciscan
sister who holds two PhDs and a chair in theology at Villanova University":

“The Catholic notion would say the priest is ontologically changed upon
ordination. Is that really true?” she asked. Maybe priestliness is not an
esoteric essence but a programmable trait that even a “fallen” creation like a
robot can embody. “We have these fixed philosophical ideas and AI challenges
those ideas – it challenges Catholicism to move toward a post-human
priesthood.” (For now, she joked, a robot would probably do better as a
Protestant.)

Delio is probably joking about
[BlessU-2](https://religionnews.com/2017/10/11/blessing-robots-is-a-
technological-reformation-coming/), an automated blessing robot from the
Protestant Church in Hesse and Nassau.

Delio continues: "We tend to think in an either/or framework: It’s either us
or the robots. But this is about partnership, not replacement. It can be a
symbiotic relationship – if we approach it that way."

Human/robot symbiosis. This is [Garry Kasparov’s concept of
centaurs](https://www.huffpost.com/entry/centaur-chess-shows-power_b_6383606),
originally from chess: "Rather than half-horse, half-human, a centaur chess
player is one who plays the game by marrying human intuition, creativity and
empathy with a computer’s brute-force ability to remember and calculate a
staggering number of chess moves, countermoves and outcomes."

So maybe the future is not dolphin popes but centaur popes: A singular human
pope in the Vatican, with a hundred or a thousand machine popes travelling the
world, issuing blessings and on-the-ground decrees wherever required.

And then if one day the human pope were to recede into the background, maybe
never seen again, but a century later in 2121 the role of pope was still
functionally maintained by the papal swarm, actually way more efficiently now,
visiting cities, ordaining bishops, ostensibly semi-autonomous like so many
Martian rovers, perhaps there’s a frail hand behind the curtain or perhaps
not, it’s best not to ask too closely, would we even notice the change? Would
we even mind?
