# Resting Posthuman Face

I have Resting Posthuman Face which means that whenever I’m being all
speculative about technology and the future, it comes across as evangelism.

The first time I remember this specifically was in 2010:

I was giving a talk at Mobile Monday Amsterdam. I kinda don’t especially
recommend watching it, but for the sake of completeness here is [What comes
after mobile](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n1Xe8LeTn9g) _(YouTube)._

The core of the talk was about _fractional AI_ (riffing off fractional
horsepower) and being able to use artificial intelligence for trivial
problems. We didn’t really have AI back then, but we were in the middle of a
[cultural anticipation](/home/2021/07/08/anticipations) – we were constantly
playing around with chatty user interfaces and anthropomorphising products.

So AI was not new, but also it was new. It was worth talking about.

After the talk a couple different people sidled up to me and their vibe was:

_yessssss one of ussss_

I don’t remember explicitly what was said but it was something like: _hey I
believe in the Singularity too and I’m all for it, do you have any ideas on
how we can immanentise the eschaton_ – (I hadn’t mentioned the Singularity,
the idea that exponential improvement in AI will turn the Moon into a crystal
of thinking computronium within milliseconds of liftoff, or whatever).

I felt like a conspirator. They had me pegged as a fellow fifth columnist,
moving hidden amongst the humans and paving the way for the machine
intelligence takeover.

I was like: _no no I just like sticking faces on things._

ANYWAY. This happens to me periodically.

e.g. #1: I could reference
[pandagate](https://twitter.com/paulpod/status/146611900942270465?s=20). I’m
not going into it because I don’t want to resurrect that whole thing but
iykyk.

e.g. #2:

When it comes to [eating the Sun](/home/2023/06/23/sun) _(as discussed last
week)_ my personal desire is that humanity should (a) yes, still be around in
7.5 billion years, but (b) should _not_ digest the entire Sun into powering
solid-state thinking matter, woven from the coarse materials of the planets, a
cube-mind as wide as the orbit of long-gone Earth.

_(I bring this up in particular because I understand that my post came across
as unalloyed star-consumption advocacy.)_

Instead we should live lightly and efficiently but broadly across the galaxy.

FOR EXAMPLE:

Is a person who doesn’t endorse eating the Sun - however eventually - in some
way a species traitor? I feel like one! Shying away from it means that my
desire is to cap humanity’s imagined future reach!

Probably not something that I _need_ to spend too much time wrestling with.
And yet.

I’m pro-thinking-about-progress for a couple reasons I suppose.

We can (and must!) bend progress towards the progressive, with work, and I
feel like it’s riding a bike or like skiing: it’s easier to inflect direction
if you’re moving forward.

Plus even awful ideas may lead to decent ones. I try to inhabit a place of
gullible credulity and see where it takes me.

SPEAKING OF AWFUL IDEAS:

On a different note I was looking at the [Apple Vision
Pro](https://www.apple.com/apple-vision-pro/) again and thinking about its
multiple forms of variable reality.

There’s the Digital Crown on the side of the headset: turn it one way and you
see the real world around you, with your app windows overlaid. Turn it the
other and you are cocooned in a virtual environment, whether that’s lakefront
in the mountains or floating in the clouds.

Even immersed you get _passthrough:_ if a person enters the room, they drift
into your bubble and they appear in your field of view.

And there’s reverse passthrough: with a feature Apple calls “EyeSight,” they
see (a simulated reconstruction of) your eyes on the outside of the headset,
accurately showing gaze direction too.

[Here’s the sequence in the Apple
keynote](https://www.youtube.com/live/GYkq9Rgoj8E?feature=share&t=5285)
_(YouTube, starting at 1:28:05)._

There’s a whole lot about eyes with the Vision Pro: you use the interface by
looking; it knows what you’re focused on.

And if _really good gaze detection_ and “variable reality” are components now,
I want to apply that combination to other things.

SUCH AS:

A window?

I know a guy with a programmatic window between two rooms in his house. You
can see through the window as clear as, well, glass. Or, with a switch, it
becomes frosted, and each room feels more enclosed.

And I wonder: how about a window which is transparent only when no-one is
looking directly at it?

Like I could have a street-facing window that lets in all that great sunlight,
and people can glimpse into my home and get a peek only through the corner of
their eyes. Turn their eyes straight at it and my window would go immediately
opaque.

Ok, windows, whatever.

How about shirts?

A shirt that is transparent only when people aren’t looking directly at it.

Somebody get Balenciaga on the phone.

Now: case in point. Playful speculation or personally-felt evangelism for a
product of tomorrow?

A bit of both as it happens. I want that shirt.
