# Why not replace bitcoin’s proof of work with proof of astrophysics

Cryptocurrency is interesting, may precipitate the collapse of civilisation,
and is extremely troubling re: carbon.

_Interesting because:_ NFTs allow rights (such as ownership but not
exclusively) to be attached to digital objects; crypto techniques underpin a
newly centralised internet swept free of gatekeepers from identity, to
payment, to data centres.

_May precipitate collapse because:_ the centralisation of handling money has
led to giant and powerful financial institutions, and the decentralisation of
money smells like the shift from centralised bronze production (which led to
captured trade routes and giant palace kingdoms) to decentralised iron,
arguably leading to the Late Bronze Age collapse, [as previously
discussed](/home/2021/09/13/bronze). LOOK: I don’t honestly think we’ll see a
collapse of civilisation, but the banks may well reconfigure to become smaller
and more numerous. Besides I find a potential decentralisation of energy
production more fundamental and intriguing.

_Extremely troubling:_ cryptocurrency takes a lot of electricity to run. And
that creates a lot of carbon. Really not good.

Crypto is underpinned by a technique called _proof of work_ (PoW) and I
understand that this is the troubling carbon bit that needs to be replaced?

Hand-waving alert, obv. I’m not close enough to crypto to understand, but if I
give the broad outlines of what I mean then someone else may fill in the gaps…

Proof of work relies on some mathematical technique which is hard to figure
out for the first time, but then easy to verify. For example:

I don’t entirely understand how this ladders up to consensus over an entire
transaction history, as recorded in the shared blockchain, but a technique
like this is key.

Because of the essentially wasted electricity and carbon cost, there are a
couple of other replacement techniques being mooted, instead of crunching
numbers.

Neither seems like a solution in the spirit of cryptocurrency. So what is to
be done?

HOW ABOUT:

Replace the Proof of Work function with something which follows the exact same
form (expensive to perform, cheap to verify: a zero-knowledge proof) but that
outgasses socially useful work as a side-effect instead of carbon.

But what should it be?

**Scientific conferences in pharma versus astronomy, the difference:**

Pharma conferences are full of scientists playing their cards close to their
chest. They don’t want to give even the tiniest hint about their research
because somebody else, knowing what is being chased down, could get there
first. So they don’t talk about their work or what they’re trying to figure
out.

Astro conferences, on the other hand, are free and open. Seen a weird blob in
the sky that might be a novel black hole or an alien superstructure? Show
everyone the printout of the telescope image, it doesn’t matter! The night sky
is so colossally huge that nobody will ever be able to find the same spot
without you telling them the coordinates. And without knowing that, they can’t
publish so your research is safe.

_(I can’t remember who shared this anecdote with me, sorry.)_

What I learn from this:

Aha!

What if… looking at the night sky is a drop-in replacement Proof of Work
function?

The side-effect of loads of crypto miners scraping the night sky with
telescopes won’t be carbon, it will be a map of the stars.

That hyper-detailed and growing map of the stars becomes a public resource for
scientists to better understand the cosmos, and also increases our chance of
spotting aliens.

Currently crypto miners are incentivised to re-activate coal power stations to
get electricity. Now they’ll be incentivised to fund new space telescopes
instead.

Bonus: the current crypto PoW method has the concept of “difficulty” built in,
and it is ramped up over time basically to account for computers getting
faster. With telescopes you can increase difficulty by requiring that you look
at smaller and smaller patches of sky. It takes longer to collect the photons
to see fainter stars, or it requires building new and larger telescopes, both
of which correspond to increasing difficulty parameters.

Caveat: I clearly don’t know what I’m talking about.

BUT

could we invent new underpinnings of cryptocurrency that pump out social good,
rather than pumping out carbon? It would be good to assemble a committee of
smart people to figure that out.

In the meantime we could just get started. NASA and SETI should create a coin.
The James Webb Space Telescope (Hubble replacement) launches in December.
Dedicate an hour a day of telescope time to this crypto project (for pay) and
fund the development of the next telescope with the proceeds.

Let’s power the new global financial machine by searching for extra-
terrestrials.
