# Previously: Bernard Vonnegut, sociopathic dating, a Facebook camera (f/e 9 July)

Six recommended blog posts from the archives, originally published this
fortnight in years past.

_(I’m enjoying rediscovering old posts, but these “Previously” summaries were
coming up too regularly. So I’m switching them from weekly to fortnightly.)_

**[Space, weather, and other novel
battlegrounds](/home/2020/06/30/space_and_weather)** (30 June 2020).

I guess what I’m just realising is that, at some point, someone had to realise
that “cyberwar” could be a thing. And what was that process like, exactly? Did
some bright kid write a memo that got the attention of the boss and the boss’
boss?

ALSO, this factoid: "Bernard Vonnegut (Kurt Vonnegut’s brother) was a chemist
who discovered in 1946…" cloud seeding. Artificial rain.

**[Idle thoughts about how we replace keyboards](/home/2020/07/03/keyboards)**
(3 July 2020).

Could I use a swiping keyboard by drawing in the air and having it picked up
by a nearby camera?

Ideas for replacing smartphone keyboards with something better – and perhaps
something more future facing for augmented reality.

**[A lengthy ramble through many responses to that FaceTime Attention
Correction tweet](/home/2019/07/04/attention_correction)** (4 July 2019).

The latest beta of iOS 13 came out, and there’s a feature called FaceTime
Attention Correction which, on video calls, silently manipulates the image of
your face so that you’re looking the other person directly in the eye. Which
on first blush to me sounded cool (eye contact is good! Maybe?) but on further
thought made me do a weird face.

The feature ended up not shipping. The collection of responses is varied and
fascinating: concerns from an autistic perspective, excitement about the
possibility of deep emotional engagement at great distance, and a prediction
from one correspondent that we should come back to: "within 3 years you won’t
even need the camera to make video calls."

**[Filtered for coherent narratives](/home/2015/07/06/filtered)** (6 July
2015).

Mixtape of the Lost Decade: “evidence is mounting that points to a ‘lost
decade’ between what we now remember as the 1970s and 1980s.” Art, toys and
music are all rediscovered – a distinct era, the 19A0s.

Also about how modern art was a CIA weapon.

Some good links in this one.

**[Facebook should make a
camera](/home/2012/07/03/facebook_should_make_a_camera)** (3 July 2012).

Facebook are interested in camera apps (they have two: their own, and
Instagram). They should make the hardware.

This was before smartphones went hard on cameras. 9 years ago! But there are
still ideas here that would make sense now: "There should be a dedicated
‘photo wallet’ Facebook album, and the front-facing screen should be used for
a dedicated showing off function."

And:

If you want the killer feature… Facebook should build on Facebook Chat to
support video, and make this camera a video chat device. Hangouts (easy,
social video chat) is the stand-out amazing feature in Google+, and Facebook
should be looking to compete.

There are current rumours of a [Facebook smartwatch with two
cameras](https://www.theverge.com/2021/6/9/22526266/facebook-smartwatch-two-
cameras-heart-rate-monitor). Better late than never! Well perhaps.

**[Operant conditioning, dolphin training, and
dating](/home/2008/07/03/two_kinds_of_training)** (3 July 2008).

That is: a couple dating should have available manufactured, reciprocal,
variable-interval operant conditioning, with a pay-off timed to the
artificially produced extinction burst, to trigger mutual addition, and they
should be able to buy this in a shop.

Starting with dolphin training, this is a concept for a deck of cards that a
newly dating couple can purchase to cause them to fall in love. Which is, uh,
only _mildly_ sociopathic as an idea?

SEE ALSO: that famous New York Times article [To Fall in Love With Anyone, Do
This](https://web.archive.org/web/20200818010639/https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/11/style/modern-
love-to-fall-in-love-with-anyone-do-this.html) (2015) which tests a
psychological study about a series of questions that, when answered by two
strangers, will cause them to fall in love. It’s a good read. If you want to
try it yourself, [here are the 36
questions](https://web.archive.org/web/20200812060110/https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/09/style/no-37-big-
wedding-or-small.html).

_Personal favourites selected from this week’s[On This Day](/home/on-this-day)
archive spelunking page. This is an experiment to see how to best surface
older ideas in the current feed in a meaningful way, and I’m trying it as a
regular feature, now every 2 weeks on a Friday. Keep-going/why-not-try-this-
instead feedback welcome._

Two recommended blog posts from the archives, originally published this week
in years past.

**[Early web videos, eye contact, and anti-
attention](/home/2020/06/22/anti_attention)** (22 June 2020).

How about a pair of augmented reality glasses with an app to manipulate
everything I see, ensuring that _no-one,_ no matter how charismatic, could
hold my gaze for longer than 3.2 seconds?

The idiom of YouTube vlogging is straight to camera, eyes locked, and that was
invented back in 2006. Zoom is all about eye contact too. But eye contact is a
unconscious engagement amplifier (and also fatiguing) – wouldn’t it be cool to
have an anti-eye-contact feature built into the computer?

**[Filtered for computers and birds](/home/2015/06/19/filtered)** (19 June
2015).

“We ask the network: ‘Whatever you see there, I want more of it!’ This creates
a feedback loop: if a cloud looks a little bit like a bird, the network will
make it look more like a bird. This in turn will make the network recognize
the bird even more strongly on the next pass and so forth, until a highly
detailed bird appears, seemingly out of nowhere.”

It turns out that, approximately 6 years ago, we saw the announcement of
[DeepDream](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DeepDream) _(Wikipedia),_ Google’s
computer vision/image generation/dreaming AI technique that created
photorealistic images out of thin air, with a tendency to diverge into trippy
fractelesque image montages in which bizarre animals could be found worming
their way out of the corners: puppy slugs.

The door was opened: the rekindling of AI as something that could operate in
the human realm, deep fakes and the undermining of reality… I can’t believe it
has only been 6 years. It’s great to look back on some of those early pieces
and see what an impact it had.

_Personal favourites selected from this week’s[On This Day](/home/on-this-day)
archive spelunking page. This is an experiment to see how to best surface
older ideas in the current feed in a meaningful way, and I’m trying it as a
regular Friday feature. Keep-going/why-not-try-this-instead feedback welcome._

Five recommended blog posts from the archives, originally published this
fortnight in years past. Mostly last year it turns out.

I’ve chosen some lightweight posts today because, well, it’s Friday and it’s
sunny outside.

**[Settling the Sun](/home/2020/07/10/settling_the_sun)** (10 July 2020).

A short one:

So could we - in our speculative solar system spanning civilisation - have the
Sun as the hub of the knowledge economy and the seat of Empire? Computer
brains the size of mountains, floating in the honey of the chromosphere …

**[Secret cyborgs and an old story](/home/2020/07/13/secret_cyborgs)** (13
July 2020)

This story from the early 2000s, about a replacement for fat and glucose:

What this researcher told me was that, in trials with rats in mazes, not only
did the rats have more endurance, they were smarter too. …

I remember specifically the current status: this novel food stuff was in human
trials, and it was currently with the US military.

**[Do humans have a north sense?](/home/2020/07/14/north_sense)** (14 July
2020).

On human magnetoreception, with this ASTOUNDING BONUS FACT:

Dogs tend to poop aligned north-south. It’s probably because they’re sensitive
to the earth’s magnetic field rather than polarised light. How do the
scientists know? Because during magnetic storms, dogs poop any which way.

**[On speaking with dolphins](/home/2020/07/20/dolphins)** (20 July 2020).

This time last year I learnt about John Lilly. Yeah. That was eye opening.

“Lilly ended up going to great lengths to speak to dolphins, including the
questionable practice of injecting his cetacean subjects with LSD, but his
attempts at interspecies communication were never successful.”

**[Filtered for sexy animals (headphones
required)](/home/2019/07/19/filtered_for_sexy_animals)** (19 July 2019)

It’s a linky post. Firstly check out this short video of [opera singers dubbed
with modem noises](https://twitter.com/ofalafel/status/1149426868556369920).

Secondly I learnt about giraffes:

My life has not been the same since I learnt that famously-silent giraffes are
not in fact mute.

At midnight, in the pitch black, the neck becomes like a pipe organ, and they
do this crazy deep ethereal HUMMING.

There’s a recording of the humming that you need to listen to.

Hypnotic.
