# Pricing hardware and changing business models

[How To Price Your Hardware Product,](http://www.hackthings.com/how-to-price-
your-hardware-product/) Marc Barros:

The mistake most hardware startups make is they don’t charge enough because
they don’t think of the problems they will encounter at scale. They don’t
calculate the real cost to deliver their product to a customer’s door, they
leave no margin to sell through retail down the road when opportunities arise,
and they can’t easily raise the price after it has been set.

Covers some good points that you need to take into account, beyond your profit
margin:

All points that are easy to forget when you’re looking at the bill of
materials for whatever the core component is.

Here’s one of Barros’ examples using top-down pricing: $200 retail means you
get $101.80 from your customer. A product cost of $58.10 means you have a
margin of $43.70, or 42.9%. He recommends shooting for a margin of 50%. All
reasonable, sensible, I like his summary for this: "Don’t be afraid to charge
more. Long term, your loyal customers will thank you for staying in business."
You’re not thanking your customers in any way if your low margins mean you
have to skimp on customer service, or developing improvements to the product
they’ve invested in.

To my mind, there are two disruptions that make this take on pricing
difficult.

I think about [Kickstarter](http://www.kickstarter.com) hardware projects in
two categories. There are those made for love not money. (And that’s cool –
hardware products, like any creative act, can be made for [1,000 true
fans](http://www.kk.org/thetechnium/archives/2008/03/1000_true_fans.php) with
the potential - but not _requirement_ \- to break through into the mainstream.
I love it.) Then there are those where Kickstarter is about getting mindshare,
learnings, and the infrastructure to build the products that come _after_ this
one – there’s no profit requirement. That’s cool too: In an established
company, products sit underwater for a long time before they break even.

These projects are low margin, funded by love and future expectations, and -
because Kickstarter is also a great distribution platform - they don’t need to
build in retail margin. Consequently the prices are lower than equivalent non-
Kickstarter projects.

I use Amazon as a proxy for the shifting sands of new business models. [The
Kindle is sold at cost,](http://blogs.hbr.org/ideacast/2013/01/jeff-bezos-on-
leading-for-the.html) or [below:](http://venturebeat.com/2011/09/30/amazon-
kindle-fire-build-cos/) It’s all touchscreen, PCBs, and battery. Where do
Amazon make their money? Well, nowhere yet… they’re a notoriously low margin,
long term view company. But once they make [$3/month additional
sales,](http://venturebeat.com/2013/01/16/kindle-fire-if-each-amazon-tablet-
generates-3month-in-digital-sales-thats-20-profit/) the Kindle Fire moves into
profit. But think about this… if the $159 was sold with the same markup
suggested by Barros, we’d see a RRP of $547. Insane.

This isn’t new. Cellphones have been subsidised by carriers for years, their
high up-front offset against monthly bills. Car financing is common. DFS
functions more like a credit company then a sofa store.

But it’s becoming more common in the hardware world as subscription
relationships become more accepted – and more necessary. When products connect
to the cloud, the cost structure changes once again. On the one hand, there
are ongoing network costs which have to be paid by _someone._ You can do that
with a cut of transactions on the platform, by absorbing the network cost
upfront in the RRP, or with user-pays subscription.

We’re finding product categories dominated by one business model or another.
It’s hard to enter a subscription-dominated category with a straight-forward
retail model. Your product will look too expensive.

**It’s not as easy as it once was.**

Enough product companies are operating at zero margin, or on some alternate
business model, that pricing hardware is no longer as simple as making sure
you have the right margin.
