# Primitive design and how I’m spending my week

I’m currently trying to wireframe a new service. Precisely what it is doesn’t
matter right now, but it’s software.

The work is less about _“this is the design”_ and more that I’m figuring out
whether this is a viable starting point for the actual design work which comes
later.

On my paper I have two lists. One is a list of top-level features. The second
is a list of desired user outcomes (things like: “have a sense of familiar
strangers”). And then I have four sketched boxes which represent screens, and
boxes on them. It’s a pretty simple service at its core…

…and it’s built out of an existing platform. It’s an application of that
platform. The top-level features already exist; hitting the specific outcomes
will steer future development (and that’s part of the purpose of this new
service: a concept car kinda).

Then I have additional requirements for the interaction design:

And the second of those is weird, right? It’s like sketching out a toy
spaceship, having a list of rules about play, and attempting to simultaneously
invent the shape of the Lego brick.

That’s platform design I suppose. Redesigning a newspaper will means bouncing
between comps and style guides, designing both. Inventing the iPhone user
interface will have seen apps and app paradigm evolving together. Those are
examples much bigger than what I’m attempting.

Actually what I’m reminded of is this: eye-balling a graph during my physics
undergrad and figuring out how to express it in simple mathematical terms,
then using that as a model to make predictions, and testing and refining that
model. The process of expressing a system as composable primitives.

Primitive design?

I’ve talked before about [primitives and notation](/home/2021/08/12/notation)
_(August 2021)_ and this process is part of that same puzzle: I want my
primitive building blocks to feel natural and well-rounded and logical; I want
my service to make sense and achieve its aims and come together neatly from
the primitives. There’s an iterative back and forth to get there, between
these two orthogonal descriptions of the same thing.

It’s enjoyable work and that’s mainly how I’m spending this week.

I’m sure other people have described this kind of process. I’d like to read
about it if it rings any bells for you.

Sorry to be so cryptic.
