# What are the problems with Big Tech?

There are increasing calls to break up, tax, regulate or _[other intervention
here]_ Big Tech. What I’m curious about is **what for.**

To be clear, **I have no position on whether these are valid complaints.** For
now I’m just collecting them.

Tim Bray recently suggested breaking up Google into separate firms for ads,
maps, Android, etc. Here’s the central rationale:

For many years, the astonishing torrent of money thrown off by Google’s Web-
search monopoly has fueled invasions of multiple other segments, enabling
Google to bat aside rivals who might have brought better experiences to
billions of lives.

File under: market distortion.

Here’s another.

The French government has proposed a 3% “digital tax” on Big Tech revenues.
It’s not yet implemented, pending negotiations to make the tax multinational.
Two stated reasons for the tax are hate speech, and the consequences of
unpoliced hate speech:

[Cédric O, the French junior minister for digital affairs] said addressing
online hate speech was also key. “Hate speech is a global public health
problem,” he warned. “The rise in online hate speech creates a major
difficulty for public powers: we don’t know how to protect our citizens online
in the same way we protect them in real life. If I threatened to kill you or
your children in the street, I’d face police. But that doesn’t exist online.
It’s both a public health issue and a problem for democracy, because if people
think we can’t protect them, they will vote for others who they think –
rightly or wrongly – can protect them.”

There’s some nuance here. Policing _does_ exist online – it’s called
moderation. The problem is that what France wants to police is different from
what Facebook wants to police. It’s not integrated with non-Facebook issue.
It’s out of step with local values. And there’s nothing France can do to fix
it.

_(Aside: I admire the public health framing because it says that Big Tech can
be good for individuals, but it dumps some unwanted externalities on society
which have to be accounted for. So the digital tax has the same logic as the
accepted levies on cigs, booze, and gambling – all of which are the spice of
life but definitely have their downsides.)_

Another!

Here’s Tom Loosemore on the decision by Apple and Google to build frameworks
for a particular kind of Covid-19 contact tracing into iPhones and Android
phones, and then refusing to cooperate with governments on anything different
from that model:

I’ll admit I was instinctively pleased when I heard of Google and Apple’s
decision. Throughout my career, I’ve defended people’s privacy from your
typical state’s propensity to collect ever more data about their citizens,
often without reason.

But in the weeks since April 10, I’ve reflected more on the nature of power.
Who has power? And how is it held to account?

What Google and Apple did on April 10 was to make a huge, global public health
policy decision – a decision that I believe should be the preserve of elected
governments.

File under: Big Tech is extranational. Undemocratic.

I can think of two other categories of issues people bring up about Big Tech.

First, it has a tendency to be dangerous. Off the top of my head, here are
some recent-ish issues to have hit the media:

Secondly, Big Tech tends not to pay its fair share in tax.

In the UK: [In 2018, Facebook paid £8m tax on £1.27bn
revenue.](https://www.wired.co.uk/article/facebook-uk-tax-bill) [In 2019,
Apple paid £3.8m on £1.2bn retail sales.](https://digit.fyi/apple-to-
pay-3-8m-tax-on-1-2bn-uk-sales/) Etc. Too low.

Whatever the rights and wrongs of this, the impression is that it’s unfair.
Big Tech has a market _at all_ in the UK because there is a good level of
education, and a wealthy economy supported by good national infrastructure –
all paid for by the state. That’s what taxes are for (in part), but the firms
benefitting aren’t making their fair contribution.

At a much smaller scale, it always seems pretty odd to me that I run my
business using online software and paying for servers that are priced in
pounds, but those same services don’t collect VAT because they’re not actually
based in the UK. But… they do operate here, otherwise I couldn’t use them? My
gut says that’s not ok.

To summarise the stated problems society has with Big Tech:

I’ve added that sixth one: power. And threat. The massive user base and
extranational nature of Big Tech gives these firms a power which must terrify
national governments. Could you, as a government, effectively regulate Amazon
or Apple if that meant they might pull out of your country? Of course not.
There would be uproar. Big Tech has produced a kind of internationalist,
corporate, non-national loyalty which could be seen as a real threat by nation
states.

These problems haven’t been levelled _only_ at Big Tech – international
capitalism is getting a shoeing of late, generally speaking. But Big Tech is
the focus.

_(If there are other categories I’ve missed, please send me links.)_

I’m collecting these stated issues because there are a lot of suggested
courses of action: digital taxes; breaking companies up; preventing companies
from selling products in their own marketplaces, and so on and so forth.

But what I _haven’t seen_ when these suggestions are made is

Without knowing what an intervention _is intended to achieve and how_ it’s
impossible to judge it. Is it good or is it bad? Will it be effective or
ineffective? Is it likely to work or not? How does it stack up against
alternatives? Who knows.

Like: the French digital tax. [The UK has a 2% digital tax on the way
too](https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/introduction-of-the-digital-
services-tax/digital-services-tax) (though it has been postponed). Will it fix
what it intends to fix? How? If not, will it compensate for the stated harm?
How will we tell? Will it exacerbate any of the other issues? Will it
introduce any other problems? Maybe I’m doing my reading in the wrong places,
but (except for France’s admirable but partial “public health” framing) these
questions haven’t been part of the discourse. _And all of this without even
agreeing the nature of the problem in the first place._ It’s poor policy.

I’m cautiously saying "stated issues" because I don’t want to make a judgement
here about issues, scale, causes, or fault.

Big Tech has been very good to me personally, and I happen to believe it is
(and has been) generally speaking a huge public good too. Yet there are
problems, and people I respect have convincingly argued that there are very
serious problems.

So that’s why I’m collecting my thoughts like this.
