# Two methods of producing butter, and two for sugar too

Trying to learn why the particular brand we buy is so tasty, I learnt that
there are _two_ methods of making butter:

The one I knew about is churning cream. I remember doing this as a kid: we’d
collect the cream from the top of milk bottles _(incidentally, why does milk
and cream no longer separate?)_ and when we had enough, whip it to make
butter.

It turns out this is called **sweet cream butter.**

The _other_ method is [cultured cream
butter](http://www.webexhibits.org/butter/culturing.html) where the cream is
allowed to ferment, like yoghurt, and the sugars turn to lactic acid (a sour
taste) and diacetyl (the butter-y taste). It’s then whipped to make butter.

One advantage of cultured butter is that it’s now preserved, so it doesn’t
need to be salted like sweet cream butter.

Cultured butter, a.k.a. European butter, is the method used by the brand I
like. (Salted) sweet cream butter only became the main butter in the UK [due
to imports after the Second World War](https://www.quora.com/Why-is-lurpak-so-
good).

Who knew! Everyone apart from me probably. I thought butter was butter.

Sugar. Refined sugar can be made

I grew up in the UK with two sugar companies: Tate & Lyle, which is I now know
is cane sugar. And British Sugar, which it turns out is beet. Globally cane
sugar is dominant, but in Europe [beet sugar has 80% of the
market](https://www.tateandlylesugars.com/cane-story-new) as beet can be grown
domestically.

Cane sugar is of course intrinsically connected to colonialism and slavery,
and credit to the Tate galleries for [including this in their
history](https://www.tate.org.uk/about-us/history-tate/tate-galleries-and-
slavery):

[It is] not possible to separate the Tate galleries from the history of
colonial slavery from which in part they derive their existence.

I mean, it’s not reparations for Empire, it’s a web page. Maybe in the future
there will be a _Tate Museum of Colonialism_ to at least begin to recognise
and explore the history (and present) on which the UK and, in particular,
London is built.

_Beet sugar._ Years old, a management consultancy friend told me a story that
is apparently legendary in, uh, management consultancy circles. The sugar
market is insanely regulated: the quantity and prices of sugar beet to be
purchased by British Sugar is set by regulation; the price and quantity of
sugar sold is similarly fixed. Therefore profit is entirely dependent on
operational efficiency.

So management consultants come in to do a bit of time-and-motion here, shave
off a few seconds there, etc.

UNTIL,

_ONE DAY,_

one heroic besuited management consultant realised a by-product of running the
refinery was _hot air,_ and this was currently being vented. What if, instead,
it could be used to run greenhouses?

And that’s how British Sugar became [the largest producer of speciality salad
tomatoes in the UK](https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/42339002.pdf) [pdf].
(Here’s a [more readable article](https://www.edp24.co.uk/news/britain-s-
biggest-tomato-source-1-692239).)

Anyway, I’m totally into this topic of commodities that have two methods of
production, which are completely distinct but - to the consumer, like me -
totally interchangeable.

I mean, I’ve only got two so far and I don’t know of any others, but I’m
keeping my eyes open.
