# Experiments with projectors and video calls

I’ve been posting recently about [video calls and online
talks](/home/2020/05/15/video_talks). And, in the spirit of that, last week
tweeted about a ridiculous experiment with an overhead projector.

[Here’s what I did, with photos.](/more/2020/05/projector-vc/)

The setup is this:

Seriously, check out the photos at that write-up. It’s a bit stupid. Plus the
rest of this post is _about_ those photos, so it’ll only make sense if you
follow that link.

It’s fun! And funny!

It’s funny to draw a lightbulb above my head which is visible to everyone
else, even if I’m not full screen and speaking. Design for thumbnail view!

It’s funny to look sideways and pretend like laser beams are coming out of my
eyes.

It’s funny to draw a speech bubble for myself.

Or to doodle illustrations around my head. Or an ocean scene, giving myself a
diving helmet. Or to scribble a diagram.

The reason to experiment like this is classic design [thinking through
making](/home/2006/07/28/about_making_things):

In this case I’m trying to learn about the interaction design. So what
_thinking through making_ says is that I should prototyping the interaction,
in however janky a fashion. (Another approach is iterative development, always
doing only the most straightforward next step that gets you closer to your
goal, but always learning and re-evaluating what that goal is. I like this
approach too.)

Anyway!

What I didn’t expect…

The projector is janky and lo-fi, which makes it fun, but it would be neat to
do this in software instead.

_(The particular problem with the projector is lighting, as you’ll see from
the experiment photos. The projection needs a dim room, the presenter needs a
bright room; it’s an unhappy compromise.)_

There’s a technology called **virtual webcams** – meaning that Zoom, instead
of using your built-in webcam, uses a “camera” which has been manipulated by
some other software first.

[Here’s how to set up a virtual webcam using
OBS.](https://streamshark.io/blog/using-obs-as-a-virtual-webcam-on-windows-
and-macos/) OBS?

OBS = [Open Broadcaster Software](https://www.obs.live). It’s free software
that, with a bit of work, lets you do things like green screen.

**Case in point:** I caught on Twitter today that [Mark Pesce is doing green
screen Zoom talks](https://twitter.com/mpesce/status/1268418871368675328?s=21)
– check it out, it looks fantastic.

BUT, BEYOND THIS,

what I want is…

I’ll give it a go when I get a chance. Who know what I’ll learn. Thinking
through making, I COMMEND THIS AS A PRACTICE.
