# Laptops should work in the rain

A friend shared a speculation this week that, as you get older, your openness
to new ideas goes to the extreme – either you ossify or you maintain (and
build!) your capacity to take in new concepts that may turn everything upside-
down.

But ALSO, a level below that, you become ever more confident in your
unprovable hunches.

For example: manifesting.

I’m pretty sure about manifesting. I don’t know what the mechanism is. I don’t
need to know. Opportunity comes your way if you believe and visualise with
enough clarity.

Perhaps, if you twist yourself into specific-opportunity-receptor, you
advertise that readiness through the social fabric, forming an amplification
circuit that brings you and the opportunity together? Dunno. Deep fate
amirite.

I speak with students and early career folks a lot in my unoffice hours calls.
There are two meta lessons after twenty years that keep coming up. Word of
mouth is unreasonably effective. You get what you do.

Which is manifesting in another frame.

Anyway I always forget about manifesting, and then something reminds me, and I
realise once again that I’ve forgotten to do it. (I’m not doing it right now
and I should be.)

I also forget about embodiment.

I was walking back from school drop-off just now with an ache in my legs
because I went out for a couple runs this week – I got benched by a running
injury earlier this year, again, and it’s taken a while to get back into it.

And that muscle ache is just _so good._

I realised, walking up the hill, that the ache is also functional: it shifts
1% of my attention to my flesh-self, full time, and that means that my diet is
better, and my posture is better, and I remember to do my stretches and to
stay hydrated etc etc. Which raises the happiness floor.

The thing is, the rest of my life steers me away from keeping in touch with my
body.

I sit in a chair cocooned in a temperature-controlled room with my locus of
self on the opposite side of a screen for 12+ hours a day.

Without that dull ache in my quads, no wonder I forget what I am.

The correct response to this realisation is to find a non-running practice to
maintain connection with embodiment, such as a weekly pilates class.

BUT NO.

Let’s instead imagine changing my day-to-day working conditions such that I am
no longer steered away from being mindful of my embodiment.

Like, how could my laptop change? That’s the object I spend most time with.

I am taken with the upcoming **Daylight Tablet** – [here’s a preview with
photos](https://arun.is/blog/daylight-tablet/). It’s a high refresh rate
e-paper tablet, like a modern Kindle, so it’s easily visible in sunlight. But
the backlight is a warm yellow, like old-school sodium street lamps, and that
lack of blue light looks so perfect.

Another datapoint: sci-fi author Kim Stanley Robinson [writes outside in the
rain](https://www.sactownmag.com/qa-kim-stanley-robinson/):

My office is my front courtyard on the north side of the house. I’ve got a
tarp slung up so that I can be in the shade all the time and see my laptop
screen. _I also work outside in the rain._ I’ve got a waterproof power cord
and it powers the laptop and sometimes a little heating pad like you use for
your lower back that I throw over my feet. I work all the days of the year out
here. In the cold, I wear my winter backpacking gear, including a down hood
and fingerless wool gloves.

I was looking at Apple’s new iPad which is ever thinner and honestly… who
cares?

AND SO…

What if there was a MacBook Outdoor Edition that

So I could sit outside in the rain with Xcode or VS Code open and hack on
apps, or do my writing.

Wouldn’t that be better? Wouldn’t that simply _enlarge_ the context of
computing, in an unpredictable fashion?

[Oliver Burkeman on living a fulfilled life:](https://kottke.org/20/09/oliver-
burkemans-eight-secrets-to-a-fairly-fulfilled-life) "When stumped by a life
choice, choose “enlargement” over happiness." (Summarised at kottke.org.)

I’m indebted to the Jungian therapist James Hollis for the insight that major
personal decisions should be made not by asking, “Will this make me happy?”,
but “Will this choice enlarge me or diminish me?”

Also product design, that’s what I’m saying.

Instead of futzing around with making my laptop 1% lighter, why not engineer
it so I’m not trapped indoors? [Come on
boffins.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EUbjpwyesk0)

How would apps be different, if people designed them and coded them in the
warm summer rain?
