# Rambling nonsense about Bitcoin, more

reddit closed $50MM funding last September ([175 million monthly active
users.](http://www.reddit.com/about/) Massively multiplayer topic-based pub
banter.) They promised to [give 10% of the shares to the
community,](http://www.redditblog.com/2014/09/fundraising-for-reddit.html) and
they’ve just said how:

[Announcing reddit notes.](http://www.redditblog.com/2014/12/announcing-
reddit-notes.html) "To celebrate all of you and your contributions, we plan to
give away reddit notes in a random lottery. As of this point, it looks like
we’re going to have approximately 950,000 reddit notes to divide among active
user accounts."

reddit notes will be a digital currency, used for tipping good comments and
other in-community transactions, backed by approx. $5MM in shares. You’ll be
able to buy and sell them for dollars. As reddit-the-company gets more
valuable and approaches IPO, reddit notes will grow in value because -
hopefully, one day - the shares will be worth actual money on the primary
market.

See also [Storj](http://storj.io) which is cloud storage - like
[Dropbox](https://www.dropbox.com) \- except that in addition to paying for
online storage, you can rent out spare space on your hard drives for other
people to use, and get paid for that. Behind the scenes it’s based on Bitcoin,
the cryptocurrency and distributed secure ledger.

What’s significant about reddit notes is that they’re tied to the success of
the company. If you have notes, you share in the upside as the value grows. If
you contribute to the success of the company by being popular in the
community, you’ll accumulate more notes via tips from others.

Bitcoin will be the underlying technology for reddit notes too.

Remember when Instagram sold? [The value of the company is the value of the
community.](http://interconnected.org/home/2012/04/11/instagram_as_an_island_economy)
I finished that post by writing "More interesting to me is the question of
what happens when the workers organise, and demand a wage that is
transferrable between the island economies of the internet. I’ve absolutely no
idea what that would even look like, a transferrable store of labour but one
in which the act and value of labour is contextually variable according to its
position in a social network. But I can’t imagine money itself looked entirely
obvious before it was invented either."

So what if every company had its own currency used for shares in the company,
for resource allocation by the company and community (e.g. balance of online
storage used and provided, or - say, with Uber - to replace _surge pricing_
and balance the number of drivers and customers), and to reward the community?
And if that currency could be exchanged for dollars?

Disclosure: I’m current an Entrepreneur in Residence at Techstars London. One
of the companies in the cohort is [Swarm](http://swarm.fund) and this is what
they call [crypto-equity.](http://cryptobizmagazine.com/swarm-manifesto/)

I’m interested in Bitcoin because it can be used as the underlying technology
for applications like reddit notes and crypto-equity.

Bitcoin is technical and has lots of new concepts all at once, but it’s not
that complicated. [How the Bitcoin protocol actually
works.](http://www.michaelnielsen.org/ddi/how-the-bitcoin-protocol-actually-
works/)

The article that really nails it: [Bitcoin isn’t Money – it’s the Internet of
Money.](https://theumlaut.com/2014/01/08/bitcoin-internet-of-money/)

The internet: "Core Internet protocols, such as TCP, part of the ‘transport
layer,’ shuffle packets of data around, but they don’t define how the exchange
of packets is then used to create meaningful communication. Internet
applications, such as email and the World Wide Web, are defined in protocols
implemented on devices at the edges of the network, like servers and home
computers, not in the guts of the network: routers, switches, hubs, and
exchange points."

Which means: "The Internet model improves upon the traditional telephone model
by making possible what Vint Cerf calls ‘permissionless innovation.’ Tim
Berners-Lee was able to launch the World Wide Web without waiting for Internet
service providers to support it."

Permissionless innovation is the key. Plus the distributed nature of the
internet… lots of applications can work together without the people who make
them needing to be in the same team. And also the layers! The bits and bytes
of the internet keep moving around, even while a particular webpage might
render badly.

As the internet is for data, Bitcoin is for money.

Look at the banks… they’re horribly inefficient when it comes to technology.
Vertically integrated stacks of slow moving, expensive code. There’s no
incentive to upgrade this technology because it’s a protective moat against
smaller, more agile competitors who can’t afford to enter. So the banks end up
being these giant bundles of all the services they provide… foreign exchange,
letters of credit for international trade, investment, mortgages and
overdrafts, merchant accounts, online balance checking. Why should the same
organisation provide all of these things?

Well, if you _did_ try to make interoperating technology for all these
services, it probably wouldn’t work. It would be insecure and error-prone.
Translating between data and currency the whole time would make things
inefficient. Hackable. But base it all on Bitcoin? Treat Bitcoin and the
blockchain as the architecture for interop between all the different bits of a
bank’s technology?

Maybe, in the future, these monolithic banks will provide infrastructural and
corporate applications only, all the other services fulfilled by an ecosystem
of small and medium businesses.

Maybe there will be a business that just does overdrafts. A business that just
does real-time credit risk. A business that just [sweeps your spare change
into investments.](https://www.acorns.com)

Unbundle the banks!

There are these industry sectors that are dominated by huge, monolithic,
vertically integrated companies.

For example, the [toy industry](http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Real-Toy-Story-
Consumers/dp/0552774065) has history been able to prevent competitors entering
using a combination of: difficulty accessing distributors and retailers; the
economics of mass production demanding mass consumption and therefore mass
media. This is being undermined by direct sales (e-commerce) and marketing via
social media.

Or newspapers and magazines. Being unbundled under the pressure of the
internet.

These get broken up in a death of a thousand cuts.

And then there are new technologies which are coming in that demand a whole
ecosystem of new businesses to really take advantage of them, and force
existing businesses to restructure to avoid being left behind.

For example, as [I said the other
day,](http://interconnected.org/home/2014/12/19/coffee_morning) to take
advantage of the Internet of Things, existing manufacturers will need new
teams and new departments to figure out how to speak directly with consumers.

The Internet of Things (IoT) is a proper deep value chain sector. I can’t
think of a single business that could do everything from the product
manufacturing, the wireless chip design and fabrication, the back-end web
services, the community management, _and_ the design, marketing and customer
service. There are a dozen decent size businesses at every step of that.

When I think of IoT, I think of that bit in [The
Graduate,](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PSxihhBzCjk) "I wanna say one word
to you. Just one word. Are you listening? _Plastics._"

Plastics? Like, pacemakers or wind turbines? Putting it out the ground or
selling it in shops?

And one of the things that preoccupies me (working with startups, and having
been immersed in the Internet of Things for a decade) is: what do you do, as a
business early into these deep value chain sectors? You have to throw a line
across the canyon to ship any product at all, but you’ll get out-competed by
people who wait for the ecosystem to appear.

Two other areas I’m keeping my eye on:

Also-watching-but-less-informed-about: Space.

I’m rambling I know. And I haven’t edited these notes so they’re a blimmin
mess stream of consciousness.

But the _meta_ I’m trying to figure out is: when you spot that one of these
deep value chains is at the beginning of a big reconfiguration, what do you
do? How do you enter it as a small business? How, as a national economy, do
you help it along and make sure the transition happens healthily?

_Update:_ [Good grief, I wrote a lot more.](/home/2014/12/23/corporations)
