# Groundhog Day is about making films, and several other reductive interpretations

6 years ago I wrote an essay putting forward a general theory of creative
work: "creative works are commentaries on the act of creation."

Like, for instance, Blade Runner. Replicants are characters in a movie:

Characters look like people, except they exist for only the duration of a
movie - only while they are necessary. They come with backstory and memories
fully established but never experienced, partly fabricated for the job and
partly drawn from real people known by the screenwriter. At the end, they
vanish, like tears in rain.

Like Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. Like replicants.

Roy knows he is a replicant. _He’s the one who comes closest to understanding
his true nature:_ that his memories were given to him, that when the short
span of the film passes he’ll be gone.

I called it the _Narcissist Creator Razor_ and the mechanism works like this:

All creators work (by necessity) from their own experience. The most direct
experience they have is their current act of creating.

Therefore the material used to construct the _inner reality_ of the creative
work is derived from the _outer reality_ act of creating that work.

TO RECAP!

In that essay I also dealt with:

SINCE THEN:

Far from revising or recanting my reductionist Razor, I’ve been collecting
more examples.

It’s about the outer reality experience of writing or filming a scene. You
have to go through mistakes, frustration, play, acting, and unknown iterations
to make genuine progress and complete it properly. Only then can you move on.

From the inside, every time is the first time. It’s impossible to know what
“done” really means, until you arrive at us. Thus the outer reality experience
is the material to perform the inner reality.

Crowley (the demon) and Aziraphale (the angel) are Gaiman and Pratchett, and
their activity of controlling the world together - not always successfully -
is the experience of authors.

Winston Smith is paranoid that O’Brien, member of the Inner Party, can read
his thoughts.

Though he believes what’s in his head is free: "Always the eyes watching you
and the voice enveloping you. Asleep or awake, working or eating, indoors or
out of doors, in the bath or in bed – no escape. _Nothing was your own except
the few cubic centimetres inside your skull._"

Smith is wrong, of course, because _we_ can read his thoughts. The novel is
told through his eyes, so we - the reader - are effectively the true O’Brien.
We are the Inner Party.

The Smith/Party/Big Brother triad in _1984_ is the character/reader/author
triad. The world is a book. That’s why the past can be so fluid: there is no
time in books; no reality except that communicated in the current line of
text.

Isaac Asimov was John Campbell’s not-entirely-willing protege. This
ambivalence about Campbell - a powerful man who created Asimov’s early success

- is re-told in the inner-reality Foundation’s struggle to get out from the
  under the thumb of Hari Seldon, who put into place the ancient Plan to lead
  them to greatness.

_(Standard caveat: Asimov and Campbell were troubling individuals.[More
here.](/home/2020/08/27/foundation))_

OR: we could read _Foundation_ and Hari Seldon in particular as Asimov’s own
conversation with [planners vs
pantsers](https://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/authors/pw-
select/article/85267-pantser-or-planner.html). You can outline as much as you
want but narrative has its own demands.

In _The Last Jedi,_ Kylo Ren says to Rey: "your parents are nobodies. They
don’t matter in this story."

He’s not talking about the First Order vs the Rebellion, but the outer reality
story of Disney Star Wars vs Lucasfilm Star Wars. Kylo is not speaking to Rey,
he’s speaking to us, the audience with bums in seats.

Remember that the Force is narrative:

Kylo is the radical side of the Force: none of it matters, not the Jedi (the
films that were first made), not the Sith (standing in here for the expanded
canon), burn it all down. We’re here to tell a story.

Rey is the embodiment of the conservative Force. She represents the side that
wants to hang onto the old Jedi vs Sith, that wants to hang onto the Skywalker
lineage. She represents the fans that care who her parents are. We’re here for
fan service.

No, says Kylo Ren, all that matters is the reboot and the new fans. We can do
this together or we can fight about it.

And _this_ is what I imagine it was like writing a script for one of the new
_Star Wars_ movies. I must have been a nightmare. The director, the
screenwriters, the marketing team… they will be wanting to create _their_ new
story, and speak to new fans. But they’re pulled back by the gravity of Star
Wars history. Of needing to keep to canon, but also by the whining fans who
grew up with the franchise. That must be an ordeal.

So inevitably that plays out in the sequel trilogy. The battle of two groups,
both psychically present in the creators’ collective unconscious, possibly
yelled in meetings, now the subject matter of the movies.

It’s a very unusual experience for Alan Moore, or any author, to live with
worlds and characters in their head for so long. So it should be expected that
we see that in the story.

Dr Manhattan. He can see the comic book. (Ozymandias thinks he can.)

It’s a fantastically efficient lens because, when you’re spending time
wondering what any creative work is about, the Razor tells you that it’s
simply the person who made it talking about what it was like to make it.

Cut to the chase!

On the other hand it must be terrifically annoying and short-circuiting for
everyone around me, because at home I’m banned from talking about inner and
outer realities entirely.
