# What I’ve been reading in 2022

Some books I read this year:

**Social software**

Dibbell’s _My Tiny Life_ is from 1998 and about LambdaMOO, a super early
multiplayer text environment. It’s all there: politics, sex, money,
governance, abuse, doxxing. As clear a case study as we could get. [I raved
about it here.](/home/2022/10/10/servers)

In _Computers as Theater_ (1991), Laurel suggests that we see the computer
interface not as the conversational "tit-for-tat" of request and response, but
as establishing **common ground:** "mutual knowledge, mutual beliefs, and
mutual assumptions."

And then:

Laurel suggests that we see the computer screen as a _stage_ on which there
are agents, some human and some software.

([Similarly raved about here.](/home/2022/05/09/npcs))

Both books were re-reads after a couple decades, and both are suddenly
astoundingly relevant again in this age of fediverses and
[multiplayer](/home/2022/11/09/map) metaverses. In my imaginary monograph on
_tools for togetherness,_ both are canonical texts.

**Good words in fiction**

_Jurassic Park_ – Michael Crichton is so plain and so deft, not a word wasted,
with poetic flourishes that are all the more vivid for their rarity: "The
surface of the lagoon rippled in pink crescents." The guy’s a virtuoso, I’d
forgotten.

(Hey and remember, [dinosaurs are the company’s _second_
product](/home/2022/03/09/filtered).)

_Nine Tailors_ – good old fashioned detective fiction. I haven’t read Dorothy
Sayers in years and… well the first section is so ornate, so dense, all church
bells and the landscape of the Fens, utterly transporting.

_The Employees_ is delicate, poignant, ambiguous; a collage of fragments of
first-person narrative from an uncertain future starship. I really liked this
AND was vaguely dissatisfied - yet can’t stop thinking about it. Form:
hypertext! Content: factory workers!

_To Be Taught…_ oh Becky Chambers. I’ve been a space opera fan as long as I’ve
been reading, and Chambers has the awe and the humanism that makes me want to
live there. I now understand this genre is
[hopepunk](https://www.vox.com/2018/12/27/18137571/what-is-hopepunk-
noblebright-grimdark) \- "weaponised optimism" \- so that’s a trail I’ll have
to follow.

_The Art of the Publisher_ talks about the books coming out of a publishing
house as a single work. Hypertext again.

_The History of Magic_ is a history of the last 40,000 years. It’s the kind of
book I love these days: very little TED-style framing, heavy on the
information, draw your own conclusions. There _is_ an overarching argument, of
course, even if it sits lightly, which is that magic is a permanent strand of
human culture alongside science and religion; and that magic, generally,
provides cosmic kinship and a framework to ask _“should we”…_ It’ll make more
sense if you read it.

My favourite section: "Shamanism and Magic on the Eurasian Steppe (c.4000
BCE–present)" – animism and landscape, and a kind of deep bedrock to the
euro/anglo psyche that I wouldn’t have noticed without having it drawn out.

It’s been a long time since I dogeared so many pages in a book.
