# Nothing is real vs everything is real

[Flowrite](https://www.flowrite.com) is an AI-enabled writing accelerator. You
type it notes, and… well, one example they give starts like this: "announcing
our new startup Flowrite. it uses AI to generate text from short samples.
product live: end of 2020."

And from that it generates:

After weeks of hard work, we are proud to announce our new startup, Flowrite.

Flowrite is a software product that is able to generate all kinds of different
writings from short samples using advanced AI.

Flowrite will be live at the end of 2020 [etc]

So it works in any browser, and the claim is that: "Over time, Flowrite will
learn your unique tone-of-voice."

As [a fan of collaborating with AIs](/home/2020/11/19/ai_collaboration) this
is _amazing._

But it’s also another indicator that we’ve stepped over some kind of threshold
in hyperrealism, and along with tools like the [MetaHuman
Creator](https://www.unrealengine.com/en-US/blog/a-sneak-peek-at-metahuman-
creator-high-fidelity-digital-humans-made-easy), deepfakes, [Lyrebird voice
synthesis](https://www.descript.com/lyrebird), in the future we won’t be able
to encounter anything without asking whether it’s real.

Maybe that’s fine. Maybe, if you’re trying to hire or teach or date, and an
email is smart or well-put-together or funny, it won’t matter whether it was
written by the actual human or generated by software. They’ll be able to use
those same email-authoring
[centaur](https://petafloptimism.com/2016/03/31/centaurs-not-butlers/)
prostheses when “on the job”.

But can you imagine taking some words seriously, or video, or a phone call,
but then finding out that the nuance was auto-generated filler.

Simultaneously, there are no more coincidences.

There’s a service called [The Spinner](https://www.thespinner.net) which
repurposes online ad targeting for precision micropropaganda:

The Spinner is a service that enables you to subconsciously influence a
specific person, by controlling the content on the websites he or she usually
visits.

The targeted person gets repetitively exposed to hundreds of items which are
placed and disguised as editorial content.

For example "it’ll surreptitiously show articles about going vegetarian,
buying a dog or initiating sex (its most popular campaign) to whoever you
want."

Those are from this 2019 article: [For $29, This Man Will Help Manipulate Your
Loved Ones With Targeted Facebook And Browser
Links.](https://www.forbes.com/sites/parmyolson/2019/01/15/a-shadowy-
entrepreneur-claims-his-online-manipulation-business-is-
thriving/?sh=52c79e6372a9)

And: "Two women used it subtly encourage a co-worker they disliked to quit
their job."

Does it work? Doesn’t matter.

What matters is that we’re accustomed to being able to discount coincidences
as mere coincidences – as much as I enjoy Jung’s
[synchronicity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synchronicity) and acausal
interconnectedness, and work hard to develop my own sensitivity to it.

But again, in the future, we won’t be able to encounter a coincidence without
entertaining the possibility that it might not be a coincidence at all, but
instead evidence of some kind of intelligent design at work.

Like, in a video game it’s fine to see an object and suspect that it has been
placed deliberately to influence direction or unlock future narrative – but it
would be tiring, in the real world, to ascribe that intentionality potentially
to _everything._ Surely?
