# 10 blogs for your newsreader

Yo big fan of reading blogs through feeds right here.

All told I subscribe to 425 blogs and newsletters using RSS feeds and a
newsreader app.

It’s not algorithmic. You see what you subscribe to (it’s free). If you don’t
enjoy a blog anymore, you unsubscribe. It’s anonymous. And it gets you off
Twitter.

Hey if you want to try out using RSS then I wrote an explainer site about what
it is and how to get started: [About Feeds](https://aboutfeeds.com).

Here’s my setup:

(Tip: You don’t need to auto-forward Substack email newsletters. Instead add
`/feed` to the end of the Substack URL and you can get the hidden RSS feed.)

I don’t read every single post that goes by. You get a list of everything
that’s new day and just kinda check in.

That said, with some sites I do make a point of reading every post.

So if your New Year’s resolution is to start reading with RSS instead of
doomscrolling social media, here are 10 such feeds to start populating your
new newsreader.

(When you click “RSS feed” you’ll probably see some weird text or the browser
will ask you which app to use. Install NetNewsWire or another newsreader and
the link will open directly in that.)

**[Bits About Money](https://www.bitsaboutmoney.com)** by Patrick McKenzie,
"the intersection of tech, financial infrastructure, and systems thinking."
[RSS feed.](https://www.bitsaboutmoney.com/archive/rss/)

I went back and read the entire back catalogue for this one. You will be
smarter about how the world works. I found this 2022 piece about how [standard
accounting practice and “gems” in free-to-play
games](https://www.bitsaboutmoney.com/archive/accounting-for-saas-and-swords/)
fascinating.

**[Centauri Dreams](https://www.centauri-dreams.org)** by Paul Gilster, "peer-
reviewed research on deep space exploration, with an eye toward interstellar
possibilities." [RSS feed.](https://www.centauri-dreams.org/feed/)

**[Feminist Friday](https://buttondown.email/feministfriday)** by Alex
Mitchell: "A manageable number of links (2-3), about or around women and
feminism, every Friday. Leans towards culture and history." [RSS
feed.](https://buttondown.email/feministfriday/rss)

_Feminist Friday_ has just moved, so go spelunking [the full archive over
here](https://tinyletter.com/feministfriday/archive). It’s amazing – you’ll
get a mix of links and then these occasional, original deep dives into
cultural history, e.g. is it true that _“blue for a boy, pink for a girl”_
used to be the other way around? [In episode 375, Alex brings
references.](https://tinyletter.com/feministfriday/letters/feministfriday-
episode-375-in-colour) Sadly after almost 10 years, Alex is [wrapping
up](https://tinyletter.com/feministfriday/letters/feministfriday-
episode-468-on-your-way) in September 2024. So get it while you can.

**[Halfman](https://www.halfman.com)** aka Jim Kosem, "design criticism to
skateboarding, socio-political pontification, historical absurdism, cultural
analysis to rock and roll all in the one place." [RSS
feed.](https://www.halfman.com/rss/)

I met some people in a pub over the summer and we spent literally 20 minutes
bonding over how absolutely electric Jim Kosem’s newsletter is.

**[Maggie Appleton](https://maggieappleton.com):** "visual essays about
programming, design, and anthropology." [RSS
feed.](https://maggieappleton.com/rss.xml)

So smart.

**[Marginal Revolution](https://marginalrevolution.com)** by Tyler Cowen and
Alex Tabarrok, "the best or one of the best economic blogs on the web." [RSS
feed.](https://feeds.feedblitz.com/marginalrevolution)

_Marginal Revolution_ is pretty high traffic but Cowen has very broad
interests beyond economics.

**[One Useful Thing](https://www.oneusefulthing.org)** by Prof Ethan Mollick.
"Translating academic research into mostly useful insights, with some ephemera
on the side. Mostly AI stuff recently." [RSS
feed.](https://www.oneusefulthing.org/feed)

Mollick always has the most grounded yet optimistic takes about AI, and is
often also the earliest. Get started with this post about [how AI will reshape
work](https://www.oneusefulthing.org/p/centaurs-and-cyborgs-on-the-jagged)
which is a breakdown of original research into how management consultants use
ChatGPT etc and whether it actually improves their output.

**[Robin Sloan](https://www.robinsloan.com):** "books and media and modern
life, and I always try to make it feel like a note from a friend." [RSS
feed](https://www.robinsloan.com/feed.xml) for updates – but for the full
experience subscribe to the
[newsletters](https://www.robinsloan.com/newsletters/).

What you’ll get is Sloan’s interests and early research for his next novel,
which could be anything. He’s typically a few years ahead of the game, e.g. he
built his own AI writing companion and reflected on how it felt _[back in
2016](https://www.robinsloan.com/notes/writing-with-the-machine/)._

**[Target_is_new](https://target-is-new.ghost.io)** by Iskander Smit: "an
exploration in the new." [RSS feed.](https://target-is-new.ghost.io/rss/) Lots
of robots, lots of AI. Links and good takes.

**[Web Curios](https://webcurios.co.uk)** by Matt Muir: "a weekly roundup of:
digital arts, online culture, web design and creativity, philosophy,
economics, sex, art, death, drugs, music, animation, literary fiction, comedy,
nihilism, advertising, marketing, pornography, rights, AI, identity, PR, and
the crippling horror of being made of meat." [RSS
feed.](https://webcurios.co.uk/feed/)

It’s long and will take you 30 minutes to read every Friday but there isn’t a
better place to get the latest weird, excellent web stuff than _Web Curios._

Want more? Check out [ooh.directory](https://ooh.directory) which is a good
place to find new stuff to subscribe to: "a collection of 2,112 blogs about
every topic."

I’d love to see some other RSS starter packs. Lmk.
