# Mid-program reflections #1 — the story so far

_This post is the first of a series of reflections on running a startup
accelerator:_

It’s week 6 out of 12 so I figured I’d write a bit about how this 3 month
startup program works, and what I’m learning from it.

The “#1” in the title is entirely aspirational. I’m writing this with my thumb
on the tube between Moorgate and London Bridge on my way to a morning meeting.
I used to write and look at email on my commute, but in 2018 I’ve been either
reading books or running. The first due to a successful new years resolution,
the second a thinly veiled response to turning 40. So let’s see how much time
I actually get to write these reflections.

In case you missed it, I’m Managing Director of the [R/GA IoT Venture
Studio](https://www.rgaiot.com) which is a three month program here in London,
aimed at startups in the general area of the Internet of Things, and it
includes investment and hands-on support. This is the second time the program
has been run in London, though there have been many more programs along the
same lines in the US.

R/GA is a global digital agency.

Mostly, the startups we work with sit with us in the office.

The London program works like this:

The first three weeks are dedicated to meeting mentors and people from the
sponsors and around R/GA. The goals are to get feedback on how the founders
are building their businesses, and to build personal relationships between the
founders and the “mentors.” (I dislike the term mentors because it sets up a
power imbalance with respect to “wisdom” and this is often inaccurate and
usually unhelpful. Instead I prefer to call people what they are, which is
experts, advisors, investors, and potential customers. But that’s cumbersome
so mentors it is.)

The next five weeks, the second phase, is called Services, and it’s what we’re
in the middle of now. A team from the agency side of R/GA, which is much
larger than the newer Ventures side, works with each company to refine and
professionalise its offer via brand, visual identity, and copy work. Often but
not always there are sub-projects focused on areas like the user experience of
particular dashboard, or the design of communications at the point of sale.

The idea, which I buy, is that by presenting in a more professional way, you
can close more customers, get more traction, and therefore build the value of
the company. Professionalising means making decisions and nailing down brand,
etc, to deepen appeal to particular customer segments by highlighting
particular benefits of the product or service. So the trick is to only nail
things down where there is _already_ positive customer traction. You have to
avoid carving in stone anything speculative. Untested ideas do not—or at
least, should not—survive contact with real customers. Putting work into
untested ideas reduces your ability to iterate them. This is toxic for a
startup, because a startup is a machine for learning. All of which means there
is a knack to Services.

We also lend a hand with more future-facing or operational tasks. Examples of
topics hit in the Office Hours sessions (I meet with each company for an hour
each week) and in meetings with our program team:

These meetings happen throughout the 12 weeks, alongside the odd workshop and
fireside chat with guests.

The third phase is called Presentations and it’s about refining the pitch, the
story, and the deck. R/GA New York has a dedicated presentations team, and
they visit to work directly with the cohort.

There’s a demo event at the end which is a kind of finish line for the formal
programming, at which point we move into a continuous phase which is
internally called Engagement. This simply means that we make sure people in
the R/GA agency know of all the startups, and we look for opportunities to
make connections that could lead to work.

Other programs—there have been a dozen or so—have a more active strand of
building collaborations between corporate partners and the startups in the
cohort.

We’re working with nine companies in the 2018 cohort. R/GA Ventures
investments to date number in the mid 80s. Here we have our first circular
economy startup. We have our first applied biochemistry startup.

I spoke with Fast Company and they did a [great write-up of all
nine.](https://www.fastcodesign.com/90160109/is-the-internet-of-things-dead-
or-is-it-growing-up)

We invest £75,000 in each company, in addition to the in-kind investment of
the three program phases, in return for equity.

Here’s what W6 involves, for me:

What I’m not saying is that most of the time I’m not with startups or in a
meeting, I’m working with Lisa Ritchie. Lisa is the Program Director here,
which means she runs operations, the budget, and the program team. Lisa has
been my single hire (for this program she has hired or selected everyone
else), from back before the first London program, and we run this thing
together. She is even more excellent than I had hoped.

When I say “we” I mean any of R/GA, R/GA Ventures, the Ventures team in New
London, this program, and the program team. The program team is me, Lisa,
Soala, and Amanda. Each “we” is great, but considering this program team in
particular, I couldn’t be happier to work with them.

My intention is to write more words like this.
