# Mid program reflections #3 – startup cadence versus agency cadence

As I write this it’s Tuesday of week 9 and it’s 8.30am so there are only two
of us in the office: me and the founder of one of the startups.

Week 9 marks a change of pace. For the last five weeks, “programming” (that
is, meetings and workshops) has been relatively light. The focus has been on
“Services”–the strategically-led creative work provided by agency teams that
makes this particular startup accelerator different from the others. In
addition there are weekly meetings with me that the industry universally and
mysteriously calls _Office Hours._

The team working on Services has produced fantastic work. It’s spot-on. The
feedback has been tremendous. And the Presentations work has already resulted
in exciting pitches, radically more easily understood.

Warning: working practice simplification and stereotyping ahead.

The cadence of how startups work:

Do something end-to-end, whether it’s a web product, hardware prototype, or
pitch deck. Get it in-front of its eventual users, customers, or consumers.
The earlier and uglier the better. Observe feedback. Iterate.

The cadence of how agencies work:

Follow the process and build foundations for the first 80% of the time.
Foundations are answers to questions like: what are the values of this brand?
To what customer segments should it appeal, targeting what motivations? At
what points of the experience of the product or service can these brand values
be made evident? Then suddenly the invisible work is completed. For the
remainder of the time create highly visible executions–web pages, sales
collateral, dashboard wireframes, point of sales communications, guides to
words and phrases to use in future marketing.

Both methods are highly effective.

The Services phase of this program poses a challenge. To a startup, agency
cadence has pros and cons.

To me this last point is the most serious: no matter how much thought and
strategy has gone into it, no work survives contact with the market. An
iterative approach is essential.

Yet work that has been over-thought becomes brittle and slow to change.

So the risk of agency work to a startup is that it takes the startup down a
dead-end with no way to turn around.

My response is to ensure that the Services phase focuses on amplifying what is
already working. Create only where there is traction and proof that customers
are responding positively.

Given the above, the question is why run a program that includes agency
services supplied to startups? The same can be asked of the Presentations
phase. I’ll let you know in another 540 words.

I said there had been a change of pace. Services is winding down;
Presentations is winding up.

This four week stretch is about creating a 5 minute pitch deck. There’s
assistance with crafting the story, speaker training, and design help to make
great-looking slides.

What’s the deck good for? It’s always handy to have an intro that hits all the
bases: the what and the why of the product; the business potential and
customer traction; the team and roadmap; the secret sauce. This intro, with
adjustments, will get used for investor intros, and also to explain the
company to partners, customers, and new hires.

A key skill in any pitch, whether you’re a founder or a young designer, is to
quickly and uncontroversially explain your idea space, so you can concentrate
the discussion on what matters. For example, how to work together. This deck
does that job.

Producing the pitch deck in this form does another job, which is to shake out
the inconsistencies in the business.

There are standard formats for pitch decks, such as the [Kawasaki 10 slide
deck](https://guykawasaki.com/the-only-10-slides-you-need-in-your-pitch/), or
the more recent [Y Combinator seed deck
template](https://blog.ycombinator.com/intro-to-the-yc-seed-deck/).

I think of these decks as a narrative versions of the [Business Model
Canvas](https://www.alexandercowan.com/business-model-canvas-templates/). I
used to be a skeptic. Surely it doesn’t make sense to outline an _entire
business_ in nine boxes on a single sheet of paper? But I’ve become a convert.

The Business Model Canvas is like an electrical wiring diagram but for flows
of motivation and money. For example:

So you draw out the business and look out for gaps or anywhere the gears
grind. When I’m starting a new project, I make a quick Business Model Canvas
to give me an idea of any dark corners. It’s not everything, but it’s a
sketch.

When you run through a pitch deck, ideally it should cover all the same
points–but with proof too. Ok so the goal is to sell such-and-such product to
such-and-such customer? Well how can that be demonstrated? Ok so the business
is dependent on a special technology. Well does that tech exist, and can it be
protected? And so on.

In Office Hours over the past two months, I’ve tried to keep in mind each
company’s upcoming pitch deck, and I’ve been steering the conversation towards
exploring some of the gaps.

I believe that a good pitch (and a good startup website, and good startup
sales collateral, and a good introductory paragraph) has got to include belief
and desire.

Desire: make your audience see dollar signs in their eyes. Make them want it.

Belief: make this seem inevitable. Show the detail. Build trust.

The sizzle and the steak.

So given my above misgivings, why do this work with the startups? Why not
operate like other accelerators, focusing on coaching and pitching?

First–some teams need to plug a design gap. If you help with the right ‘kit of
parts’ then it’s a proper leg up.

Second–the process is useful. But you could get the thinking via Office Hours
and conversation, right? Why do the additional hands-on strategically-led
creative if there’s a risk of compromising the startup’s ability to iterate?

So, for me, the answer can be found on the customer side: some customers, big
and small, judge a book by its cover. Even when meeting a startup with crazy
new technology, a radical business model, or simply a better mousetrap,
they’re put off because the website isn’t professional, the sales deck doesn’t
quite express the whole story, or the dashboard looks a bit fiddly.

Big corporates are not monolithic. They are, internally, networks, and these
networks resist anything which is hard to understand. Sales material will be
passed around behind the scenes to people who are finding out about the
startup for the first time. The product will be used be people unfamiliar with
startup norms, and seen by people who aren’t trained. An aspirational story
will transmit better than a hair-shirt story. Etc.

More than that: an employee of a big corporate who takes the reputational risk
of introducing a startup wants to look smart to their colleagues. No matter
the quality of the startup’s product, if the benefits are hard to understand
or it’s easy to give a kicking, it’s not going to fly.

In short:

Corporates want to be innovative. A path to being innovative is to work with
startups. But when they meet a startup, they often can’t digest it. So either
the corporate has to change. You could push water uphill. Or the startup can
change–just a little bit–to accommodate the relationship. A spoonful of sugar
helps the medicine go down.

Iterate with the agency cadence, then amplify with the agency cadence.

My feeling is that’s what makes R/GA’s programs different: in the DNA of the
organisation is partnering with corporates around innovation.

One last thought. Despite all of this, startups shouldn’t look _too_
professional. The character of the team should still shine through.

Once you take away the product and the revenue model and the technology
breakthroughs, the big reason that a person working in a big corp wants to
work with a startup is that they love hanging out with startups.

For a few years I’ve run a session at [Bethnal Green
Ventures](https://bethnalgreenventures.com) about sales and marketing 101.
(It’s an incubator for social good startups. Early stage. Great organisation.)
I joke about people who work in corporates. I say they have miserable lives. I
say they wish they could leave but they have mortgages and school fees and
they’re addicted to holidays. Instead they live vicariously by working with
startups. So take advantage of it.

It’s a horribly mean thing to say and it’s certainly not the whole truth. But
there’s definitely a glamour that mustn’t be washed away. So I’m also paying
attention to that, in the Services and Presentations phases.

Anyway. It’s Friday now, somehow. Next week: week 10.
