# Mid-program reflections #2 – how to run Founder Stories

It’s the middle of week 7 and we had our third Founder Stories session on
Monday. [(Here’s some general background on the
program.)](http://interconnected.org/home/2018/03/21/reflections-1)

Back in the winter of 2014, [Jon Bradford](https://jd.me) roped me in to be
EIR at Techstars London where he was Managing Director at the time. Techstars
is the standout global network of startup accelerators. They’ve worked with
over 1,200 startups, all via three month programs built around mentoring.
“EIR”–my role in that single program–stands for "Entrepreneur in Residence"
and it’s a fancy phrase for hanging out, lending Jon a hand, and getting
exposure to all the companies and the programming while figuring out what to
do next.

Founder Stories was a component in that program: every week or so, a founder
of a more developed startup would come in and present their story, with a Q&A
afterwards. I loved it. I’m pretty sure the startups on the program all loved
it. When it came to running a program myself, I wanted something that did the
same job. So I nicked the format.

Here’s how it works:

I have a bunch of buddies who run startups. For a Founder Stories session, I
invite one of them in for an hour-long interview with the program cohort as
audience. The interview is 40 minutes; the open Q&A is 20 minutes. It’s an
interview because it minimises prep time for the guest.

The session, ideally, runs 5-6pm. Last year we ran it later, but that meant
that people with home lives found it hard to join. So this year we’re running
events in the evenings as little as possible.

I get everyone in the room to introduce themselves to start with. This opens
up the room, and provides practice for founders and team members to introduce
their startups in just one sentence. The final person to introduce themselves
is our visiting founder.

I have a pattern for the interview:

If the founder brings up a particular topic, I like to follow it along and see
how it develops over the stages of their company. If they are interested in
team dynamics, I like to ask how the team has evolved and how processes have
been adopted. If fundraising comes up, it’s interesting to follow that thread.

Endpoints often seem either unattainable or inevitable. My goal is to point
out the steps and to show a chain from then to now. If you can imagine such a
journey, you can work on taking it. If you can’t imagine your shoes taking
those steps, you won’t even notice the opportunities and invitations that come
your way.

Here’s what I avoid:

I prefer to avoid gasping at luck or indulging in struggle. This is
entertaining, but puts the founder on a pedestal: they must have been
exceptional in some way to get through it. I don’t want them to appear
anointed. I want the founders in the audience to think, hey, that could be me.

There are small ways of building identity between speaker and audience. One is
to avoid stages and use low chairs.

I want the startup story to become normal. Almost mundane. This is delicate
because the founders who visit to tell their stories _are_ exceptional.
Getting this far is rare. So it’s not a matter of popping the balloon but
rather steering the conversation to acknowledge that success is a combination
of, yes, luck, and also talent and hard work. Sometimes, for a new
entrepreneur, the key to unlock success is to recognise their own talent and
their own superior knowledge about their domain.

It’s such a balance. My favourite founders balance humility to listen and
learn from their customers and advisors, with a strong resilience grounded in
an understanding of their own talent and a mysterious vision. Plus luck! It
takes belief that sometimes the universe hands you luck in order to notice it
and drink from it.

Here’s why I think Founder Stories is useful:

A startup is as much an approach as anything else–an approach to solving
problems (visionary yet iterative and data-driven), language (the strategy of
startups is there for the reading, but it’s encoded in a shorthand that you
can learn through immersion), an understanding of what is normal (it’s easier
to ride the tiger if you know what to expect), and an ecosystem of reputation,
introductions, and people. Reading this back, I realise that I don’t mean that
startups have an approach. Startups have a culture.

One of the jobs of a successful accelerator is to transmit startup culture.

(Different accelerators do that in different ways, and that they do on-top is
what makes different accelerators appropriate for different startups at
different stages. And just to be clear, an accelerator isn’t a necessary step
in a startup’s life. There are many other ways to be part of the culture, and
joining an accelerator should be a considered decision like any other business
move.)

I say transmit because culture isn’t taught.

When I think of transmission I think of the way a sourdough starter is created
by taking a fist of the original starter, and growing it with flour and water.

My go-to analogy used to be that you can’t cold-start a gut biome. If a person
unfortunately loses their gut biome, it has to be replaced by taking a sample
of a compatible biome from inside another living person and medically
transferring it. But the connection with startups always got lost as I started
getting into the reasons and methods of fecal microbiota transplants, so I
abandoned that particular explanatory method as possibly too distracting.

Demystifying. Allowing a new entrepreneur to picture themselves further along
the road. Scouting ahead to build familiarity with the language and the
challenges. Hearing the story isn’t (or so I believe) directly about learning.

We’ve been lucky to have Hal from [Unmade](https://www.unmade.com), Bethany
from [Tech Will Save Us](https://www.techwillsaveus.com), and Emily from
[Blaze](https://blaze.cc) share their stories so far. We have a couple more
Founders Stories lined up.

After Emily’s visit, one of the founders in the cohort said to me that she
could see a bit of herself in Emily. Seeing Emily let her know that, in
building her startup, being herself was okay.

Big moment.
