# Coffee from ice cream vans, and other remote working perks

Ok, so I wasn’t expecting this tweet to get _(checks numbers)_ 865 likes and
93 retweets:

Honestly, screw commuting and screw Pret. I love working from home

But why not have a coffee truck that drives around the suburbs like an ice
cream van? I’m sure we could come up with a “flat white” jingle for it to
play.

The context is that we’re all being told to get back to the office, and that
it’s selfish to do otherwise because coffee shops, etc, in cities are
suffering. See, in Grazia: [When Did ‘Save The NHS’, Get Overtaken By ‘Save
Pret’?](https://graziadaily.co.uk/life/in-the-news/boris-johnson-back-return-
to-office-august-1/)

But going back to exactly what we were doing before seems like a pretty
unimaginative way to save the economy. It turns out that many people love
working remotely, and we’re learning how to be good at it.

Perhaps, rather than struggling to preserve old businesses, we can let them
evolve and build new ones too?

**By which I mean:**

We’re used to office perks and the benefits of working in a business
neighbourhood: free snacks (if you’re lucky), a comfy chair, good lunch spots
nearby… _what future working-from-home perks can we invent, if we’re in this
for the long term?_

Like, is there remote work _facilities management_ that can come set up my
desk and give me a sound baffle/backdrop for my video calls? (Has Ikea
launched a Zoom kit yet?) If I were a manager, could I expense _desk beers_ on
Fridays for my team, and is there a company that can sort that out? Is there a
startup which will organise virtual movie nights, or a surprise snack box in
the post, or streaming event once every couple of weeks? Could my local train
station [get itself a suburban WeWork](/home/2020/04/13/empty_office_space)
for the times I actually need a meeting room?

It would be unrealistic for even a sizeable firm to run all these perks
itself. But if they were all services that were contracted out? That’s our new
economy right there.

Then there’s good coffee and the social life. It can feel pretty distant
sometimes at home. But while it’s nice to have face-to-face banter, does that
really need to be with co-workers? I’d just as soon have my _water-cooler
moments_ with the people who live on my street.

All of that was going round in my head.

I also have a refreshed love of my neighbourhood.

We couldn’t get online grocery delivery slots at the beginning of lockdown,
and our local shops really stepped up. I’ll never forget that. One nearby cafe
flipped its model into selling flour and dried goods, the interior becoming an
ad hoc storeroom.

That experience sparked me to [write about local e-commerce back in
May](/home/2020/05/28/grocery_shopping). In short: what if I could order and
get same-day deliveries from the local businesses that I want to support, as
an antidote to the usual faceless e-commerce giants?

So an ice cream van that pulls up, jingling out the MIDI version of Josh
Wink’s _Higher State of Consciousness_ at 11am, everyone on the street downing
tools and heading out for a caffeine hit and to catch up with friends?

I’m maaaybe 50% kidding.

But the underlying provocation stands: what if we aimed to make remote working
as great an experience as a fancy office, and what if we did it in a way that
boosted both human contact and our local neighbourhoods, and what _new
businesses_ can we imagine that would enable this?
