# Post at 15.36, on Monday 28 Feb 2011

[RentAFriend.com](http://www.rentafriend.com/ "No, really.") "has Friends from
around the world available for hire. Rent a Friend to attend a social event,
wedding, or party with you. Hire someone to introduce you to new people, or
someone to go to a movie or a restaurant with. Hire a Friend to show you
around an unfamiliar town, teach you a new skill or hobby, or just someone for
companionship. You can view all of the profiles & photos on RentAFriend.com
right now for free!"

I have a hunch that television is really bad for us. When we can speak about
social psychology with the same degree of accuracy as we can liver function,
we'll find that TV has been poisoning the social body. Future generations will
look back and say, _What?? You used to train your children into believing the
environment and other people were non-responsive to their moods and
expressions? Are you insane?_

Facebook is better. At least it's not passive. Although I'd like to test this.
Let's find two remote Canadian towns, cut off physically from the rest of the
world by winter. One we'll accidentally-on-purpose break television. The other
we'll accidentally-on-purpose break the web. Then: observe.

There's something dangerous, still, I'm sure, with Facebook. I don't know what
it does to a person to have social interaction without proximity of bodies.
It's weird to do talking without smelling. I can feel my [Jacobson's
organ](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vomeronasal_organ "Pheromone detection,
behind the nose.") shrivelling up like a walnut.

Facebook is a technology of
[disembedding:](http://answers.yahoo.com/question/index?qid=20090209145318AAlAqlR "Giddens.") "social relations are no longer confined to the 'local context.'
Rather, the location of individuals and the time frame in which they interact
has become indefinite. It is hard to say when this began, but the development
of a postal service is a good example. With mail, social relations could be
conducted across broad geographic areas (no longer limited to the local
context) and within indefinite time spans (due to the time lag in mail
delivery)."

Money is also a technology of disembedding. In barter, the goods to be
exchanged need to come together in time and space. With money - the
crystalline form of trust - there's no need.

Disembedding isn't bad. A community of one hundred people couldn't support -
and wouldn't need to support - a cartographer, but a community of a hundred
_thousand_ has just the niche for such an abstract role. And I'm glad, because
I like maps. Big communities are supported by disembedding.

But now we have a trade-off. Currency to disembed exchange of goods from
markets in town squares is, well, handy. Social currency to disembed exchange
of friend interactions from the fuggy physical world of smells and touches
is... well, handy - in that I get cartographers - but a teeny bit inhuman.
Possibly. Facebook (and the like) _also_ means eventually smelling and
touching people you'd otherwise have never met. And television gives you
things in common with a billion people you'll probably _never_ meet, although
you might.

I don't have a conclusion. And I'm not planning on renting any friends.
