# The surprising effectiveness of writing and rewriting

In _The New Yorker_ earlier this year: "The first major interview with one of
the most revered comedy writers of all time."

John Swartzwelder, comedy writer, separates “writing” and “rewriting.”

Since writing is very hard and rewriting is comparatively easy and rather fun,
I always write my scripts all the way through as fast as I can, the first day,
if possible, putting in crap jokes and pattern dialogue–“Homer, I don’t want
you to do that.” “Then I won’t do it.” Then the next day, when I get up, the
script’s been written. It’s lousy, but it’s a script. The hard part is done.
It’s like a crappy little elf has snuck into my office and badly done all my
work for me, and then left with a tip of his crappy hat. All I have to do from
that point on is fix it. _So I’ve taken a very hard job, writing, and turned
it into an easy one, rewriting, overnight._ I advise all writers to do their
scripts and other writing this way. And be sure to send me a small royalty
every time you do it.

I wonder what’s going on here, deep down, because I recognise it. Sometimes
I’ve been circling a topic for weeks and just can’t figure out how the essay,
or talk, or report or whatever is going to work – and what unblocks it is to
tell myself: _stop thinking, just write what’s in your head however poorly._

I always come at that realisation far too late. One characteristic of this
trap is that I’m slow to recognise that I’m in it.

But if I started writing too _soon,_ it would be terrible and not in a
redeemable way.

So there’s a difference between productive thinking and procrastinating
thinking, even though they feel the same.

RELATED (in my head) is this post about decision making from Rands’ blog on
leadership: [Ok. So, You Can’t Decide.](https://randsinrepose.com/archives/ok-
so-you-cant-decide/)

First, the paralysis might mean you’re subconsciously aware you’ve missed an
essential aspect of the decision

BUT, says Rands, sometimes "the move is sometimes to just yolo decide."

And then:

You instantly become mentally limber.

And:

A profound change of perspective follows making a decision. It’s no longer
theoretical; it’s happening. You are doing something as opposed to talking
about doing something. Even better, as potential consequences begin to arrive,
you gather initial essential data on the quality of your decision.

Three guesses about why writing/rewriting works as a process:

Writing often feels like having a conversation with myself. I stare at a
sentence and reply by revising or writing another.

Writing-as-thinking and writing-as-communication and the interplay between
them. A creative act of sculpting thought outside an individual mind. What a
magical thing is the written word.

_(I wonder if software tools could support this process more directly. Like,
could I dictate in a rambling fashion a vague idea, and an AI text generator
turn it into a cogent paragraph for me to revise? And so on and so forth.)_
