# What I’m doing now: R/GA IoT 2018

Early in 2017 I ran an accelerator in London investing in Internet of Things
startups, and it went so well that we’re doing it again. Tell your friends.

**Upcoming events:** see the bottom of this post for some places we can meet
over the next month.

The program in 5 bullets:

If you’d like to see an example of the visual identity work, I love the look
and messaging of [Flock’s website and app](http://flockcover.com/) (alum
2017). Flock sells pay-as-you-fly drone insurance, using a proprietary and
automatic risk algorithm, and is now - impressively - partnered with Allianz
for underwriting.

For me, Internet of Things means digital reaching into the real world. My
favourite startups use now-mature IoT tech (whether hardware or software) to
do something that wasn’t possible before, such as [insanely accurate
pedestrian football](https://www.hoxtonanalytics.com/) by using artificial
intelligence to count shoes, or [halving food waste in commercial
kitchens](http://www.winnowsolutions.com/). Both of those are companies in the
2017 cohort. My favourite IoT startups don’t say IoT on their homepage.

Here are the [2017 alumni](https://www.rgaiot.com/alumni/). I’m delighted with
how the cohort is going. (Some are now based here at R/GA London where we
offer below-market desks to portfolio companies.)

The website: [R/GA IoT Venture Studio UK](https://www.rgaiot.com/) with info
about the upcoming program.

Last year only 3 of the 9 companies in the program had women founders. That
tells me we didn’t do a good enough job.

This year, I’d like to get info out especially to women and people of colour.
If that describes startups you know, or you know groups and networks that are
representative, I would appreciate your help to spread the word. Please share
a link to this post.

There are a number of ways we can meet/talk.

Applying to the program is easy: [use the form
here.](https://www.f6s.com/rgaiotventurestudiouk/apply)

**We’re accepting applications until 7 December 2017.**

We’re also always looking for more sponsors. Companies like Snapchat,
Westfield Labs, and Intel like working with R/GA Ventures because they get
visibility in the emerging tech ecosystem, and early access to startups which
are ready to partner. Let me know if you’d like to chat more.
