# Post at 16.19, on Thursday 6 Jan 2011

Back in, shit, _1997,_ three bubbles ago, sixteen years ago, when "liberal"
had just stopped being a dirty word on its way to being a good word before it
was dirty again, I got into computer games for the second time. I'm now on my
fifth: the first was the BBC Microcomputer Model B, which I liked at school,
and the third through fifth were and are: _Animal Crossing_ on Nintendo;
iPhone casual games; Xbox after I got _really_ hung-over last year, after my
sister's wedding. I was into a game called **Riven** which was like walking
around a beautiful place of trees and water and cliffs and cable-cars, with
atmospheric music and puzzles. You would click around lush, rendered images,
with occasional movies. Playing _Riven_ is like PowerPoint meets _Alice in
Wonderland._ It was as great a piece of world-building as I've ever seen in a
video game. The sprawling world of _Riven_ has an alternate history and an
alternate physics (I'm not kidding: water has bizarre physical properties).
You don't so much solve puzzles as wander around looking at the scenery and
poking things until you intuitively _understand_ the new world, and then
you're not solving puzzles, you're just doing what comes naturally. I would
spend time in Riven in the dark with headphones and scotch. In retrospective I
could have spent more time with my friends in the college bar that term.

And now [Riven is on
iPhone!](http://www.cyanworlds.com/iOS_Riven/Riven_iOS/Info.html "Everyone
else is excited about the Mac App Store that launched today. Not me, I'm old-
school.") It's [very
pretty.](http://www.cyanworlds.com/iOS_Riven/Riven_iOS/Gallery.html "Pictures
from Riven.")

Oh happy day!

I feel old.
