# Robots for folding laundry at home: two approaches

I’m still kinda surprised that home robots stalled out. Nothing big since
Roomba launched 20 years ago.

Ring’s home security drone, which monitors your house by flying a camera
around inside on pre-set paths, was announced in September 2020 and is still
MIA – [you can apply for an invitation to purchase
one](https://www.theverge.com/2021/9/28/22692048/ring-always-home-cam-drone-
amazon-price-release-date-specs) _(The Verge)._ Ring is an Amazon company.
Amazon’s _Astro_ robot is also invite-only but is shipping: it’s a smart
speaker on wheels and has optional cup holder and (coming soon) blood pressure
monitor accessories. [Check out some Astro customer
videos.](https://www.theverge.com/2022/2/22/22945814/amazon-astro-home-robot-
photo-video)

But why not more?

Economics? Hardware has never been great for margins – if you’re a big tech
firm, put your effort into software and platforms to gather data to drive
marketplace activity.

Maybe it’s just too hard to make something good? In the old days, technology
commoditised really fast component by component. But maybe the requisite tech
isn’t easily available and reconfigurable – mmwave radar is new and
specialised to cars; the AI to move in the home requires vast amounts of
training data, an expensive proposition in itself. So in previous cycles we
got wild invention from the recombination of commoditised tech, and that
process has blocked somehow.

What if it’s a lack of imagination?

FOR INSTANCE:

[Foldimate](https://foldimate.com) is a home laundry folding robot.
_(Thanks[Howard van Rooijen](https://twitter.com/howardvrooijen).)_

It’s the size of a fridge and you feed your clothes in at the top, a bit like
feeding a giant laser printer one sheet of paper at a time. PC LOAD
UNDERPANTS. It hasn’t shipped yet.

Alternatively, from 12 years ago: [Berkeley scientists develop a robot that
folds towels](https://news.berkeley.edu/2010/04/02/robot/). _Absolutely you
must watch the video: the robot arm rotating the draped towel for the computer
vision camera is uncanny and beautiful._

And whereas Foldimate feels like an approach that’s so focused that you have
to ask why you would bother, the Berkeley approach is more generative…

If you had a robot arm to fold towels, then why not pick it up and move it
around the house and get it to do other things?

Do the dishes.

Knead sourdough.

Mix cocktails.

Catch tiny house plant flies out of the air, for as long as those darn things
are lifecycling away in the top inch of soil (guess what I’ve been dealing
with recently).

What if it _is_ an imagination problem? The success of Apple means that
companies nowadays want to be vertically integrated: figure out the product,
but then also figure out the potential ecosystem and where to situate oneself
in the value chain to extract maximum profit… and don’t do anything at all
unless you can see a route to get there.

What if we’re all so out of the habit of thinking of general purpose
technology that nobody’s thinking really hard about robot arms that are both
safe around kids and programmable to e.g. both pick up toys and also make
cupcakes when you hand it the ingredients?

There’s an interesting paper to be written on why innovation like this _isn’t_
happening.
