# A short ballet piece from Romeo and Juliet

I think probably the most beautiful thing I’ve seen in the last few months
(and not just because I’m culture-starved) is this 4 minute 39 seconds video
on Instagram:

[A short piece from _Romeo and Juliet_ from Ballet Opera de
Paris.](https://www.instagram.com/tv/B_CRB0SHmqP/)

It was published in mid April, shot in the lockdown deeps. It’s all in
portrait mode. You see the dancers’ own homes – which is part of the privilege
and intimacy, I think, to see who is in an apartment; who has their own
studio; who is simultaneously wrangling their kids. Woven together with
Prokofiev’s music, of course.

I just wanted to share that.

I saw _Romeo and Juliet_ at the Royal Opera House in London in 2015, my first
time seeing the ballet. In my life, I reckon I’ve probably seen, read,
studied, or performed parts of that play maybe… 20 times? Including one
decent-length section re-enacted loudly with friends, from memory, at a party.
WE KNEW HOW TO LIVE WHEN WE WERE 15. You get a lot of Shakespeare growing up
in the UK.

I have a faint memory that both R & J were the young understudies, the regular
performers both ill.

I have a strong memory that this was the first time I had ever truly
understood Juliet’s torment and decision, and her real understanding of the
weight and consequences of that decision. What a performance!

There’s something odd about growing up with a play, especially a great one, is
you can kind of take it for granted. Yes of course it makes sense, yes yes
yes, it’s a good story, that’s what they do, yes fine.

But then, after seeing, reading, studying, and/or performing it 20+ times (who
can say), to be watching this story written 420 years before, to suddenly see
these people as _people,_ and for the first time to truly understand and
believe and feel and, what’s more, _agree_ with their emotions and actions –
I’ll never forget that. It was like I was seeing it for the first time, and as
personal as hearing a story from a close friend. The actual _moment_ of
Juliet’s torment: the choreography was such that she was alone on the stage,
not dancing, just sitting and staring at the audience, and you could see her
whole body tortured and clear-eyed deciding what to do. It’s etched into my
mind’s eye, and my breath catches when I think of it.

And for it to happen with _ballet,_ where there’s no pretense at realism… well
it’s a reminder that verisimilitude is not the be-all and end-all I suppose,
and that the classics are the classics for a reason, and that I ought to seek
out more ballet when this is all over.
