# Post at 14.58, on Tuesday 4 Jan 2011

Rory Hyde interviewed me last year, after I spoke at [Thrilling Wonder
Stories,](http://www.thrillingwonderstories.co.uk/ "Which was awesome. I spoke
about fractional A.I.") and he's put the result online: [Know No
Boundaries.](http://roryhyde.com/blog/?p=569 "Interview with me after
Thrilling Wonder Stores.")

I like interviews with people carrying voice recorders. I say things that I
don't expect to say, but I _also_ force myself to pause and think how to say
it before I speak. And then somebody else turns it into proper English and
asks another good question. So I surprise myself. A handful of decent things
came out:

_On products:_

I think the idea of products is really important. I have these things I look
for in our work; one is hope, I think our things should be hopeful, and not
just functional. Another is that it should be beautiful, inventive and
mainstream. I think mainstream is important because otherwise you're just
affecting a few people. A product is a good gate because you start to ask 'how
is this going to be consumed by the market?' We don't have many ways of
judging whether something is really good, and money is one of them. And that's
kind of what products do.

I will say something about why to invent as well. Because you could see our
work as experimental, or science-fiction, or futuristic; but I would say - and
others in the studio may not agree with me - that our design is essentially a
political act. We design 'normative' products, normative being that you design
for the world as it should be. Invention is always for the world as it should
be, and not for the world you are in. By designing it, it's a bit like the way
the Earth attracts the moon, and the moon attracts the Earth just a tiny bit.
Design these products and you'll move the world just slightly in that
direction.

_On Fractional A.I.:_

About 'fractional AI', I reference two things there, one is artificial
intelligence as it is seen in movies of the mid twentieth century; human scale
or larger intelligences as seen in books by Arthur C. Clarke or Isaac Asimov
for instance. But then there's this idea which emerged in the early 1900s of
fractional horsepower. Horsepower used to be the thing that we measured
factories by, but fractional horsepower says that instead of motors that are
as big as buildings, we could have motors that were as big as fists. So we
could take the fruits of these factories, make them really really tiny, and
put them in our homes. Fractional horsepower enabled genuine improvements in
quality of life, through appliances like washing machines, refrigerators and
hairdryers. And we had half a million fractional horsepower motors in the US
by the 1920s, it was an incredible explosion that made domestic life better.

My belief is that we're going to have the same explosion with artificial
intelligence. And we won't see it as was depicted in films as controlling
nuclear weapons (War Games), or controlling space ships (2001). Fractional AI
means that the tiny things around us will be smarter. And the very first place
you see this in a very tiny way is in children's toys. It used to be that
children played with Meccano or Lego, now they play The Sims. The Sims is a
representation of a world in which everything is intelligent in really tiny
ways, and we'll be seeing more of that I think in conventional products. What
does an intelligent car look like? It maybe only will be as intelligent as a
puppy, so what does that mean?

_On the shift from the industrial to the domestic:_

We've experienced a shift in the last fifty years, in that the bleeding edge
of technology used to be industry, so the objects we got in our homes were the
off-cuts of industry; look at computers, or the mobile phone, or the internet;
those came from industrial mainframes, or battlefield communications, or
decentralised information systems. We've experienced a flip now, the
technology we have starts on the desktop, in games consoles, or from texting
your mates. That is the bleeding edge of technology, and it is leading the
way. And it's quite unsurprising that the world we were trained to be in - the
industrial one - was one that's a bit soulless, where you had to follow
orders, be a cog in the machine. So maybe we're not quite trained right for
the things we're being asked to design now, which start from the domestic
sphere. Now that's incredibly exciting, because we get to look at other
disciplines for where we should learn our craft, and maybe that's character
animators, child psychologists, cartoonists, or architects of intimate
domestic spaces instead of office buildings.

_Thanks Rory!_
