# Post at 18.27, on Tuesday 8 Jan 2008

[Rude words from 1811.](http://www.fromoldbooks.org/Grose-VulgarTongue/ "'Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue'")

[A game in which you have to cooperate with your past
selves.](http://www.nekogames.jp/mt/2008/01/cursor10.html "Confusing and
excellent.")

Continuing from last year's [rambling on the Second Second Law of
Thermodynamics](/home/2007/12/28/wrapping_up_2007#eleven "After entropy,
life."), I don't mean that entropy doesn't increase. But somehow, as it
increases - as disorder increases - it releases some _another_ measure, a
measure which can either be thrown away or harnessed and turned into life. You
know what I mean? As you shake a packet of cornflakes, it settles down. Think
of the decreasing height of the cornflakes in the box as entropy increasing,
and that's a decent enough analogy because the level will never spontaneously
increase again. But in the _process_ of the height shaking down, the larger
cornflakes float to the top! A size sorted gradient of cereal emerges! That's
the magic of percolation. Where does that order come from? Perhaps you pay for
it with increasing entropy. What if, while you were shaking it, multi
cornflake autocatalytic networks evolved that optimised their chance of
getting to the top? What do we call this second-order order?

Anyway I was thinking that if my dishes and cutlery were made out of diamond,
or something like it but harder, I'd be able to just throw them into the
dishwasher instead of having to stack them, because they couldn't break. And
then I'd have the washer agitate its contents really vigourously, because then
the casserole dishes would float to the top, and the forks to the bottom, and
putting stuff away would be an ordered process.

The disadvantage of diamond plates, of course, is that diamond conducts heat
too well. If you were holding an ashtray in your hand and you stubbed out a
cigarette on it, you'd burn your palm. And you'd be contributing to your
chances of getting emphysema and a number of other unpleasant conditions.

I find that certain mental states are good for certain tasks. No caffeine is
good for doing my taxes, running and washing up. Walking with no music and
being in the shower is good for insights into problems. Coding then beer is
good for questions like 'how could this become the case?' and 'what are the
implications of it, were it to be the case?' Being hung-over and tired is good
for creative writing. Being cross, elated, care-free or cocky is good for new
ideas.
