# Vibe shifts in the Upper Anthropocene

Hey before generations there were ages.

Like the Atomic Age? The first nuclear weapon was detonated in July 1945 and I
think the best way to describe the societal psychic response is _self-awe_ –
an optimism and terror at the power in our hands.

(And if the early 2000s was the colour of ubiquitous blue LEDs, design in the
40s/50s/60s was all about uranium orange and glowing radium green.)

I find it incredible how clear it was to everyone that it was a new era.

FOR EXAMPLE:

The 48th head of the Ismaili faith was Aga Khan III, born in 1877.

The position is hereditary. And yet: Aga Khan III, in his will in 1957,
skipped over the line of succession to name his _grandson_ as the new Imam,
saying:

In view of the fundamentally altered conditions in the world in very recent
years due to the great changes which have taken place _including the
discoveries of atomic science_ I am convinced that it is in the best interests
of the Shia Moslem Ismailian Community that I should be succeeded by a young
man who has been brought up and developed during recent years and in the midst
of the new age and who brings a new outlook on life to his office as Imam.

(He had previously spoken about the two worlds: "the world of material
intelligence and the world of spiritual enlightenment.")

So the new Aga Khan IV (who is a good man) was known as the _“Imam of the
Atomic Age”_ and he is still the leader of the faith today.

More poignantly:

John Wayne, legendary actor in westerns, died of stomach cancer in 1979.

It is speculated that the cancer was caused during the production of [The
Conquerer](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Conqueror_(1956_film)>) in 1956,
where the filming in Utah was in the fallout zone from the above-ground
nuclear tests of the time.

Cowboys to atom bombs. What a hand-off between eras.

People tried the _“Information Age”_ on for size but the term never really
became a thing.

Not like generations.

As far as I can tell, Strauss and Howe [introduced the modern framing of
generations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strauss%E2%80%93Howe_generational_theory)
_(Wikipedia)_ in their 1991 book _Generations._ Their follow-up book _The
Fourth Turning_ which put forward the idea that eras cycle through four moods,
causing a cyclic pattern of four generation archetypes to match:

Each cycle lasts about 80-90 years and is called a _saeculum._ We’re coming up
to the end of one now. (What’s next?)

It was Douglas Coupland who named and popularised **Generation X** and it
caught the zeitgeist to such an extent that generations pretty much displaced
ages in folk historical sense-making.

Personally I buy the idea that boomers exist, but reckon it’s less about
biorhythms for history, and more about the fact that they were kids while cars
were getting popular.

See this tweet…

Bad news: Leaded fuel reduced the IQ of everyone born before 1990 by ~4.25%.
Millennials are the first to be born with unleaded gas.

_The paper referenced:_

Bellinger DC. [Childhood Lead Exposure and Adult
Outcomes.](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/article-abstract/2613136)
JAMA. 2017;317(12):1219-1220.

No wonder millennials are so cranky! Imagine being slightly brighter than
everyone else in the world.

RELATED, this absolutely brutal and totally unnecessary skewering of
millennials in _The New York Review_ is HILARIOUS: [The Balletic Millennial
Bedtimes of ‘Normal People’](https://www.nybooks.com/daily/2020/07/15/the-
balletic-millennial-bedtimes-of-normal-people/) by Lorrie Moore. (The article
is paywalled but you get to the best section just before the cut-off.)

Anyway Gen Z folks are the best. Love em.

Where are we in history?

We want to predict the future and find certainty. We want to know the answers
to questions like:

In Roy Lewis’s 1960 sci-fi novel about a tribe of Stone Age hominids, which is
super funny (I’m not kidding, read it), [The Evolution
Man](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Evolution-Man-How-Ate-Father/dp/0679750096)
_(Amazon),_ Father spends much of his time (a) inventing, and (b) muttering
darkly about whether they are in the Upper or perhaps only Middle Pleistocene,
like he’s a time traveller or something trying to brute force his way into the
future.

And I find myself acting a bit like that.

…thinking to myself, gah I thought we were in a _Crisis_ but perhaps it was
just a Strauss-Howe _Unravelling,_ we haven’t got to _Crisis_ yet, and it’s
still got a way to get worse before it gets better.

Maybe we should go back to comets to milestone our way through history.

I remember seeing [Comet Hale-
Bopp](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comet_Hale%E2%80%93Bopp) in the sky in
1997, which was visible with the naked eye for well over a year, just
_hanging_ there in the sky like a moon made of ethereal fog from the unknown
reaches of the cosmos, the most visible comet since 1811, and blimey what an
omen, I should have guessed that something was up.

Signs and portents!

Somebody on reddit
[said](https://twitter.com/genmon/status/1497953749435920391) "with the 2020s
going down in history as ‘the roaring WTFs’" and yeah maybe that’s the name.

Mind you reddit also talk about _“Late Capitalism”_ and I have to say, my
response is: huh you’re optimistic.

Hey are we in the Upper Anthropocene already? Like, in a million years time
when they dig back down to the paper-thin geological layer of plastic
microbeads, CO2, and crushed bitcoin ASICs, is this the top layer they’ll see?
Or are we still in the Middle Anthropocene and there’s still a ways to go?

Like everyone else I read that article about the Vibe Shift in _The Cut_ and I
have been endlessly going on about the new vibe since.

A vibe shift is the catchy but sort of too-cool term Monahan uses for a
relatively simple idea: In the culture, sometimes things change, and a once-
dominant social wavelength starts to feel dated.

… the thing that struck fear into Ellen’s heart was Monahan’s prediction that
we were on the cusp of a new vibe shift. It is unnerving because when you
really consider it, you can feel people flocking to a new thing. You can see
that he’s right; something has shifted.

The concern articulated in the article: "not everyone survives a vibe shift."

I am not-even-kinda but ACTUALLY massively in love with this, both the new
vibe itself and the concept of being left behind.

It has been a concern to me that normcore is still around; popular music
hasn’t really changed since the 90s basically; I still get what the kids are
talking about. I want to be baffled and confused at clothes and mores and
music, barely hanging on by my fingertips!

Which hasn’t happened. Until now?

Now my sense is that the internet is thinning out as everyone is disappearing
into discords and other [Dunbar spaces](/home/2021/01/07/dunbar_spaces). It’s
quieter, right? It feels like being in a club where the crowd is imperceptibly
thinner. Everyone is off to afterparties and I don’t know where. It’s
brilliant.

So just as we were done with ages, maybe Gen Z is the last one and soon we’ll
be done with generations. We’ll need a new way to refer to the current era.

Saeculum shift.
