# SAGE and a glimpse of group computing from before the PC

There was a fork in the road away from group computing, way back when.

Right now we’re in the era of _personal_ computers. Collaboration, social use
of tools, togetherness: all of these are hacks on top of something that, at
its core, was designed for the individual first.

But there’s a particular photograph of group computing from the 1950s, from
before the PC was invented…

Ok I need to rattle out a story here about SAGE, and that will let me get to
the photograph.

I’m going to do this from memory so apologies in advance for any factual
errors, but I think I’ve got the bones of it in order.

_(Earlier this year I did a three part talk about the pre-history of computing
and so a lot of this is in my head from then. It was a super fun talk with a
novel format – three x 1 hour talks on successive evenings across a single
conference, each picking out and storytelling around particular moment in the
evolution of today’s technology. And it got great ratings in the feedback. I
was pleased about that.)_

To get to SAGE and to put it in context, I need to rewind a whole way.

ONCE UPON A TIME.

One way (not the only way) of telling the story of computers goes like this.

Tabulating machines were invented in 1890 for the US Census and went on for
the next 50 years without any fundamental changes but with great popularity in
business. They were electromechanical sideboards that basically ran a small
set of Excel commands on stacks of what became standard issue IBM punchcards –
which we retain today in the shape of air flight boarding cards.

The Second World War was a catalytic event. The need to quickly calculate
ballistics tables led to the first fully electronic computer, ENIAC (which
also became one of the world’s first programmable computers in the modern
sense), although the initial task in 1945 for this room-sized machine was
numerical modelling for the hydrogen bomb at the tail end of the Manhattan
Project, the vast secret project to create nuclear weapons.

_Let’s take a moment to name the first of the first, the original programmers
of ENIAC, all women: Kay McNulty, Betty Jennings, Betty Snyder, Marlyn
Meltzer, Fran Bilas, and Ruth Lichterman._

Skip ahead to 1968 and the invention of the personal computer. Douglas
Engelbart’s team attaches a screen to a military computer and, in 90 minutes
in _The Mother of All Demos,_ demonstrates a whole new user interface:
interactive text, video collaboration, modern office furniture, and the mouse.
The demo consisted of Engelbart managing his shopping list.

The PC was an audacious conceptual leap: "the idea of an individual computer
being used by a single person for their own specific work tasks was akin to
the idea of a baseball stadium being used by one player" _([Alex Handy, The
New Stack](https://thenewstack.io/49-years-ago-douglas-engelbart-predicted-
future-mother-demos/))._

**Between the milestones of ENIAC and Engelbart there was SAGE.**

For comparison: The Manhattan Project in the 1940s cost about $20bn in today’s
money. SAGE cost $60bn. The _Semi-Automatic Ground Environment_ was built out
over the 1950s and was a direct defence against the atomic weapons developed
in the mega-project of the previous decade, a continent-wide sensing,
synthesis, and rapid response platform blending human intelligence and
technology. It ran for over 20 years.

The SAGE system, by the time of its full deployment, consisted of 100s of
radars, 24 direction centers, and 3 combat centers spread throughout the U.S.
The direction centers were connected to 100s of airfields and surface-to-air
missile sites, providing a multilayered engagement capability. Each direction
center housed a dual-redundant AN/FSQ-7 computer, evolved from MIT’s
experimental Whirlwind computer of the 1950s. These computers hosted programs
that consisted of over 500,000 lines of code and executed over 25,000
instructions – by far the largest computer programs ever written at that time.
The direction centers automatically processed data from multiple remote
radars, provided control information to intercepting aircraft and surface-to-
air missile sites, and provided command and control and situational awareness
displays to over 100 operator stations at each center.

Imagine a network of radar stations covering the whole of North America,
constantly looking out for nuclear bombers. SAGE never spotted one; bombers
were quickly replaced as delivery mechanisms by the ICBM. It was the prototype
for today’s air traffic control system.

Radar signals came into the 24 direction centers, were analysed by people and
computers, and instructions sent out again to bombers and missile silos: the
original _WarGames._

Each direction center was built around an AN/FSQ-7 – at 250 tonnes, the
largest computer ever built. (With the transistor replacing vacuum tubes a few
years later, the largest that ever would be built.) Then what you’ve got with
SAGE is 100+ operator stations plugged into the same computer.

[You can see the weapon’s director console
here.](https://www.computerhistory.org/revolution/real-time-
computing/6/120/505) There’s a circular screen, like a radar display, and a
light gun to select radar traces. There are toggle switches and a numerical
rotary dial to tag the traces with numbers.

This is interactive computing in the real world for the first time!

So, for me, this is the pre-Engelbart breakthrough moment.

And in a way, it’s more authentic than any research project. What we see in
SAGE is a new interface forged under perceived existential threat, something
_actual,_ not philosophically derived or imagined by lone genius, but
contoured along the grain of known human behaviour.

On the left hand side of the console there is an ashtray.

_(Also it is not lost on me that the light gun was the particular interface
device that was popularised by its use in this military system. Imagine being
so accustomed to weapons that it feels entirely natural to select an icon on
your computer screen by pointing a gun at it.)_

The successor to the AN/FSQ-7 was intended to be the much smaller,
transistorised AN/FSQ-32.

Engelbart’s team in Stanford got its start in 1963 when it was given its first
research contact by J. C. R. Licklider, director of ARPA: the US Defense
Department’s Advanced Research Projects Agency. Licklider made it a condition
that, instead of using a standalone computer in Stanford, Engelbart had to
start by connecting a display to the new AN/FSQ-32.

So a connection from SAGE to Stanford and that brings us back to the PC.

But it wasn’t inevitable that the Semi-Automatic Ground Environment would be
followed by the personal computer.

I’m kinda obsessed with a particular road not taken…

LOOK AT THIS. Here’s an archive photo on Wikipedia: [Subsector Command Post of
SAGE Combat Center at Syracuse Air Force
Station](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semi-
Automatic_Ground_Environment#/media/File:SAGE_CC-1_Hancock_Field_New_York.jpg)
with "consoles and large Photographic Display Unit display, which was
projected from above."

_Group computing._

What you can see is ten men sitting around a [Kelvin Hughes Photography
Display Unit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Photographic_Display_Unit) – a
large screen for displaying graphics and characters. The third floor of a SAGE
direction center: _The Pit._

Each of the men (yes all men) has their own computer console at their desk.
But they’re working together around the PDU. One of the men is holding what is
either a light gun or a laser pointer/equivalent. They’re assessing potential
threats and ordering missiles and bombers. Together.

(Here’s a great article about the physical architecture of SAGE: [The
Futuristic Cold War Era SAGE Air Defense Bunkers Looked Right Out Of A Kubrick
Film](https://www.thedrive.com/the-war-zone/26959/the-futuristic-cold-war-era-
sage-air-defense-bunkers-looked-right-out-of-a-kubrick-film).)

So we’ve got a system here in the 1950s which is on some axis _more
sophisticated_ than the rooms with similarly large yet typically less
intelligent screens that I regularly sit and have meetings in, seven decades
later.

This isn’t a setup for presentations and discussions. It’s for collaboration
and action. The whole room is an _environment_ for the team to work.

And I often, often wonder this:

WHAT IF, instead of the Personal Computer, the dividend of SAGE had been the
Team Computer?

A computer that wasn’t used individually but as a group, together in a room or
perhaps remotely. Not desktops but environments. An alternate history of
computing that doesn’t involve user IDs or ownership as primary concepts but
is instead oriented around collaborative, co-created artefacts, spaces that
are jointly inhabited. It’s hard to mentally unfold such a world, from such
different initial conditions, imagining its progress lensed through Microsoft
Office analogues, video games analogues, World Wide Web analogues, over such a
stretch of time.

It would look something like [DynamicLand](https://dynamicland.org) but with
decades of evolution. We got just a glimpse of the path.
