# Sales pipelines, consultancy, and navigating the lockdown

I gave a talk, right at the beginning of lockdown, about how to keep your
business going when the context changes. _a.k.a. perspectives I wish I’d had
at various points over the last 20 years._

One topic was about how to find clients (or customers, or partners). I’d just
had a 6 month project evaporate so this topic was very much on my mind – the
project I’d been developing was in the _80% Likely_ bracket of my pipeline,
and I had been enormously looking forward to it.

(The talk was at the tail end of that 6 week period around April where
literally all economic activity went on pause. It still bad now, but for that
period is was _zero_ and we didn’t know it was the tail end at the time.)

The way I see it, when you’re building a company _(and I include under that
everything from startups to individual practices)_ you’re building two things:

That “machine” is usually about selling the product for money. I think about
it as (loosely) a pipeline with four stages:

The beating heart of a company is to perform activities to drive this machine.
A pure software play with sales automation will have one set of activities. A
consultancy will have another, such as:

These are the ACTIVITIES which _appear_ to create results.

But here’s another way of thinking about it: the activities are only effective
because they catalyse a pre-existing, active, INVISIBLE CONTEXT.

What do I mean? Well, I’m thinking about my own boutique consultancy right
now, [Mwie Ltd](http://www.mwie.com), and when I think about what’s going on
behind the scenes, there are stories like…

The invisible context is made up of these kind of conversations, existing
business processes, my reputation, shared language, and so on.

To dig deeper, my “machine” broadly operates in _two_ contexts:

These are active, vibrant contexts, and mostly _out of my sight or direct
control._

If my marketing and sales activities are successful, it’s because they are
effective _only within_ these invisible contexts.

(One of the reasons it takes time to build a company is the machine and
invisible networks need time to evolve together – and this happens often
naturally, without having to give it much thought.)

So I hit a particular problem at the beginning of lockdown: I usually stay top
of mind by having coffee with people, and I develop projects over a series of
informal meetings.

But what happens when suddenly all conversations are happening over Zoom? And
what happens when half my week is given to childcare _(as emotionally
delighted I am about that)._ I have fewer conversations. ALSO: my friends have
fewer conversations. The serendipity part of the machine no longer functions.

And how about developing projects? I used to build trust over lunch and
whiteboards. Is trust built in the same way over Zoom? Who knows, maybe
building common ground happens in a different way. And how about the goals of
the work itself? What if I’m preparing the ground for the wrong kind of
projects. It’s all up in the air.

I [refocused Mwie Ltd on its 5th birthday](/home/2019/11/13/mwie) in November
2019, and now the machine is broken.

What what I did personally - and this is also what I said in my talk - is
decide that I have to go back to the beginning.

I can’t assume that any part of my business machine will work.

All I can do is begin at the beginning, and feel my way.

What is the beginning? **Awareness.** I can do is talk about what I’m
interested in and show that I’m available.

And out of that, I can have conversations. And out of that, I can talk about
work. And out of that, I can develop projects and figure out how to run them
in the new normal. All from first principles; I can’t assume that anything
I’ve done before is the right way to go now. I’ve done it before, I can do it
again.

So that’s why I’ve been blogging. It worked, by the way.

WHAT’S INTERESTING is the work that has been developed is in no way what I
would have expected. And so the next task is to figure out how to generate
this kind of work deliberately.

I have two main things that keep me busy, in a work sense:

The sales process for Job Garden is a whole different ball game than the
consultancy, and I’ll talk about that another time.
