# Post at 14.14, on Saturday 26 Feb 2011

This morning I've been watching the [cricket world
cup,](http://cricket.yahoo.com/ "Pakistan/Sri Lanka today.") playing the
lovely, simple iPhone game [Tiny
Wings,](http://arstechnica.com/gaming/reviews/2011/02/tiny-wings-is-
everything-perfect-about-iphone-games.ars "Movie of gameplay too.") doing some
basic scenario planning for work, and a little tidying, during which I ran
across some [UK coins designed by Matthew
Dent,](http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/7326491.stm "Beautiful.") which I must
have collected when they were released.

Work is brilliantly odd and fun (and busy with a trajectory to becoming crazy
busy) at the moment. Lots of pots on the bubble. Just today, on the BERG blog,
there's a sneak peek at the [art of
SVK,](http://berglondon.com/blog/2011/02/26/svk-meet-thomas-woodwind/ "Meet
Thomas Woodwind.") the comic we're working on with Warren Ellis and Matt
Brooker. I should make a list of everything that contributes to my general
feeling of living in the Absurd.

But not right now, as I'm off to an exhibition about
[Isotype.](http://www.isotyperevisited.org/2009/09/isotype-picture-
dictionary-1.html "Picture language.")

Last thing: blue eyes are blue not because of pigment, but because of the
[Tyndall effect:](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tyndall_effect "Wikipedia
page.") "light scattering by particles in a colloid or particles in a fine
suspension. ... It is similar to _Rayleigh scattering,_ in that the intensity
of the scattered light depends on the fourth power of the frequency, so blue
light is scattered much more strongly than red light. An example in everyday
life is the blue colour sometimes seen in the smoke emitted by motorcycles."
_Rayleigh scattering_ has slightly different physics, but is the reason the
sky is blue. Neat.
