# Don’t drop bombs, drop schools and hospitals

Videos consultations with doctors turn out to work pretty well. How about
this: we get shipping containers and we fit them out as remote-first family
practices. Consult doctors over Zoom. Also with Amazon lockers filled with
aspirin, common medicines, etc, remote unlocked by giving out a code.

Initially drop the shipping containers here in the UK, in communities where
it’s hard for people to travel due to the lockdown. Then kit out the
containers with satellite internet, and use the airdropped health centre as
part of international aid: doctors here in the UK taking shifts; patients
wherever they live. (To support a team of people who are actually on the
ground doing the leg-work, of course.)

Assume all that works… then I would suggest researching robot surgeons and
tele-operated operations.

Next: schools.

It turns out remote education works pretty well too. Fit out shipping
containers as supplementary classrooms so teachers on the ground can rotate
kids through additional lessons. Allow for self-directed learning for adults
too. Put a big screen on the outside and run English language courses.
Teaching assistants based here in the UK, of couse.

Look: the NHS Nightingale Hospital London got going after _9 days_ starting
from the government’s request for assistance. It’s an exhibition centre turned
into a temporary hospital with a 4,000 bed capacity; it launched with 500.
Here’s the story from the architects BDP, [including the instruction
manual](https://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/news/nhs-nightingale-bdp-on-the-
first-nine-days-converting-the-excel-centre/10046749.article).

This is going to sound like a tangent but it’s not. And it’s going to lead to
a place which you might find uncomfortable, because it’s about war, and I
apologise in advance:

I went to a last-minute protest on Whitehall a bunch of years back, and
somehow in the midst of all the crowds and chants, I ran into a friend. And he
was meeting one of _his_ friends, and they were going to the pub to meet some
folks from a military think tank. So I tagged along.

I ended up sitting next to a researcher and having a long conversation about
propaganda and Russian Twitter bots, and all of that is a topic for another
time, but the reveal was that this guy’s business card revealed that his
specialism was **non-kinetic effects.**

That is, the kind of war you can do without chucking stuff at people.

I think there are a bunch of situations now where bombs don’t help. Bombing
doesn’t help in Syria. Bombs don’t help when young white men are being
radicalised into domestic terrorism.

I’m not a pacifist. I probably lean towards being an interventionist. But I
don’t feel that bombs and shooting people have proven themselves particularly
effective.

So after that conversation in the pub, I started thinking about what I’d drop
instead of bombs. Schools and hospitals. Well, why not? In the 1950s and
1960s, [it was jazz](https://www.hoover.org/research/swinging-freedom-radio-
free-europeradio-liberty-and-power-jazz):

Founded in 1950 and secretly funded by the CIA, Radio Free Europe (RFE) began
broadcasting from Munich to Soviet-controlled Czechoslovakia in 1951. … Soon
RFE was broadcasting to Poland, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria.

And:

Western music, and jazz in particular, became a popular form of resistance
against the Communist regimes, especially in Eastern Europe.

Things we are good at in the UK:

If I was in charge of the UK’s industrial policy, [in addition to betting on
distributed supply chains beating China](/home/2020/04/01/supply_chains), I’d
also be betting that “distribution” (how value moves from producers to
consumers) is going to make a massive shift too, because of telepresence and
tele-operation. I would be funding research bringing together the above,
creating schools and health centres, remote operated and packaged into
shipping containers; designed, built and staffed in the UK.

Then I’d use these for better serving communities at home, profit (this is a
way of taking the UK’s strengths to bigger markets), for international aid,
and (um) for _non-kinetic effects._

I suppose my meta-point is that we’re moving to a world where services that
_can_ be delivered remotely _will_ be delivered remotely – but that doesn’t
mean that both sides need to be speaking at a tiny moving image on a phone.
There are more imaginative ways to skin the cat.

Hey so then what else?

English common law is widely respected. Stuff the shipping containers with
terminals to speak with lawyers to draw up commercial agreements, and
arbitration suites with UK-trained judges. All remote.

Next: discos, probably. Music is massive UK export. Eurovision aside we’re
really good at it. Drop nightclubs in shipping containers, stream in all the
good stuff. Good sound system, good lights. Hearts, minds, and banging techno.
