# Like, just a post complaining that screens should be better

Given how many screens there are, you would have thought there would be more
new stuff.

It’s been 20 years since Apple shipped the Mac OS X
[Aqua](https://guidebookgallery.org/screenshots/macosx100) interface, with all
its reflections and transparency – the one Steve Jobs called "lickable."

So where’s my operating system which has a physics engine plugged in? One that
moves the reflections along with the time of day, making the on-screen light
source travel with the sun?

It’s been 19 years since Pixar released _Monsters, Inc._ with all that CGI
hair. Where are my hairy icons? Ones that get all long and knotted as the
notifications number goes up.

Why can’t I feel my phone? I found that paper from 2010 [(when I was
complaining about keyboards)](/home/2020/07/03/keyboards) about using
precision electrostatics to make **artificial textures** on touchscreens.

I should be able to run my thumb over my phone while it’s in my pocket and
feel bumps for apps that want my attention. Touching an active element should
feel rough. A scrollbar should _slip._ Imagine the accessibility gains. But
honestly I don’t even care if it’s useful: 1.5 billion smartphone screens are
manufactured every year. For that number, I expect bells. I expect whistles.

There are probably all kinds of reasons why screens are basically sharper now
and that’s it. Lack of competition. Developers wouldn’t support it. Whatever.
Cars were better when they had fins. They don’t have fins now and they aren’t
as good, I’m not interested why. What’s the point of technology if we’re not
going to have fun with it.

The Nintendo 3DS came out in 2011 with a lenticular layer on the screen that
allowed everything to be slightly 3D.
[Autostereoscopy.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autostereoscopy) It was
awesome for 3D photos. Almost a decade later – surely this should be on tablet
computers now and really really effective? Imagine the medical imaging
applications.

Why are we stuck with only three pixels for red, green, and blue? Why isn’t
there a fluorescent yellow pixel to make alerts really pop? If we don’t play
we won’t find the uses.

In 2012, iOS 6 had [metallic buttons with faux
reflectivity](https://www.theverge.com/2012/6/13/3082329/ios-6-button-tilt-
change-reflection). It’s 8 years on. Why isn’t there a fourth pixel, and the
fourth pixel is a _mirror?_ Come on people it’s 2020.
