# Settling the Sun

I ran across an interesting science fiction provocation… [why not settle the
Sun?](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2020/07/we-colonize-the-sun-first.html)

Oddly, though space colonization is a hugely popular topic in science fiction,
I can’t find examples of stories set in this scenario, of most activity
cramming close to the Sun.

Indeed: "most stories focus on activity moving in the other direction" –
inhabiting Mars or the moons of Jupiter.

The argument goes:

… it seems to me that planet Earth has a lot more raw materials than it does
energy. Our planet is huge; its energy is more limited. And raw materials can
be recycled, while energy cannot. So my guess is that Earth will run out of
energy long before it runs out of raw materials. Thus the main attraction of
non-Earth locations, besides nearness to Earth, will be energy (and cooling).
And for energy, the overwhelmingly obvious location is the Sun.

This also makes me think about the Sun’s deep gravity well. It take energy to
lift material away from the Sun; it’s free to move material toward it.

So could we - in our speculative solar system spanning civilisation - have the
Sun as the hub of the knowledge economy and the seat of Empire? Computer
brains the size of mountains, floating in the
[honey](/home/2018/01/16/filtered) of the chromosphere; turbines astride the
free energy gradient driving endless cognition, artificial intelligences
orders of magnitudes superior over anything else in the eight planets, running
finance, planning the economy, and weaving computationally-expensive but
material-light diversions: the arts, high-def luxury VR, parties…

And, in this scenario, is the rest of the solar system basically the material
feedstock for this celestial seat of decadent dominance, a 25th century
British Empire, glittering wealth propped up by a vast extractive network
taking labour and material from those who work in the dark?

The history of colonisation is one of resource theft and the erasure of humans
and non-humans alike. I’ve used it here because it’s in the title of the
article, but it’s not a word to be used lazily. See this previous reference to
the [ethics of space exploration](/home/2017/10/17/filtered).
