# I imagine cave paintings as ancient virtual reality

To get into the caves of Niaux, in the south of France, you drive to the
foothills of the Pyrenees, buy a ticket - it’s open to tourists - and then
wait for your turn to go through the metal doors which function as an airlock.
I visited a few years ago.

We walked through a series of dark tunnels and caverns for about 20 minutes, a
kilometre. The mountain hangs overhead and so I think about the hundreds of
metres of solid rock, upwards, before reaching even the ground again. The
centre of the mountain is a realm impenetrable and unimaginable. Take the
remotest, loneliest place on the surface of the Earth: I could at least in
theory reach that spot. No such access to the world of rock.

At the end of the tunnels there is cave art 13,000 years old.

Along the way there’s a cartoon sketch of a deer. [Here it
is.](https://www.bridgemanimages.com/en/prehistoric/prehistory-representation-
of-a-deer-in-the-cave-of-niaux-in-ariege-photography/photograph/asset/4402271)
It’s so contemporary, so alive. The deer is bright-eyes and smiling. I felt so
connected over so many thousands of years.

The final cave is decorated with bison, in their twos and threes, these small
groups covering the rock face all around.

It’s beautiful.

Although the bison are sketched in the sparest of lines, they’re not
caricatures, they’re accurately draw and brought to life by the shadows cast
by the light and the uneven surface, and the rock which is also unevenly
coloured, red and brown and black.

With a fire in the middle, the shadows of people would have mixed with the
drawings and the shadowy landscape.

At the time this felt to me like a kind of reverse hologram.

The 2D drawing would imply a 3D presence in the space - invisible yet there
none-the-less, the bison is right next to you, it has to be if, like my shadow
it is cast on the wall.

Suddenly in my imagination the cave felt crowded, real people and implied
bison, all together, moving in and out of the shadows, honestly all of us at
an equivalent level of visibility, who is to say what is real, the bison on
the distant plane visible too - drawings on a cave or a distant herd at dusk,
it’s all the same.

Virtual reality.

Rock is a medium.

I’ve been reading recently about the work of archeologist David Lewis-
Williams:

although in Western thought rock is the most solid and stable of substances,
for the Bushmen [in southern Africa] it is a veil on to which images of the
spirit world are projected. Paintings are tracings of these projections, which
makes the eland on the cave wall a rendering of an even more real eland in the
spirit world on the other side of the rock face.

Some can cross between worlds:

The task of the shaman is to pierce the veil, contacting the spirits and
bringing back to the everyday human world vital information.

The shaman:

"Bleeding from the nose and displaying particular postures, such as a throwing
back of the arms, indicate to others in the cave that the shaman is moving
between worlds."

Based on cave art in France that resemble shaman images by the Bushmen, Lewis-
Williams puts forward that the underlying belief systems are the same.

Lewis-Williams also argues that _the rock face for French Palacolithic people
was seen as a membrane, with the animals existing, perhaps in more perfect
forms, in a world on the other side of the rock._ Evidence for this comes in
instances when natural cracks in the rock are used to help to provide the
shape of an animal; also, as we have seen, the interest in pushing bone and
other materials into rock cracks may be an attempt to commune with the spirit
world on the far side.

Strong caveat: "For many, Lewis-Williams takes a number of steps too far."

SEE ALSO: Computer screens??

We’ve never quite got a handle on what a computer _is…_

I won’t get into definitions. Except to say:

The image of shamans twisted at the rocky cave-wall interface, travelling in
the realm beyond the membrane, reminds me of nothing so much as, well, _me,_
hunched over my smartphone, unnaturally contorted to jab with my thumbs, an
overwhelming feeling of being _elsewhere,_ the screen a veil and on the other
side a world that I can visit but can never stay in, my eyes blind to the
physical room and others here.

What I DON’T mean to say is that that Zoom is a form of astral projection.

Nor do I wish to suggest that there was a now-lost industrial society in
prehistory, the shamanic elite making use of full-bodied user interfaces to
search the Upper Palaeolithic equivalent of Wikipedia, data carried not on the
fibre optics of today’s internet but via telluric currents, faint and
discernible only deep underground far away from the Sun, recording and
bringing back vital knowledge about bison movements and weather and so on -
and gossiping with other shamans thousands of miles away on Rockfacebook or
whatever.

_(Though how else would you describe computers to a society ten thousand years
distant?)_

INSTEAD my point (I think) is that it’s not so absurd to think about cave art
as a kind of virtual reality. Just as we understand VR today: it’s real and
breathtaking often too, but also we know it’s not really real, but _also_
there is the willing suspension of disbelief. Us humans are sophisticated,
happily self-contradictory participants and always have been.
