# Ok hear me out iPhones should have a sense of shame

I was flying (not this trip; I took the train to Amsterdam) and the guy in-
front of me didn’t activate airplane mode, just browsed reddit till he lost
reception. Then got back on coming down. I glared at him invisibly from
between the seatbacks.

And that’s fine I guess? Like I doubt airplane mode actually _matters,_ planes
have got to be pretty well radio-hardened. Do what you want.

But.

He was so nonchalant about the whole ignoring-the-safety-instructions thing. I
wanted him to at least experience the tut of social disapproval before
deciding to break the rules.

Also,

Like, yes, do these things, fine, whatever, it’s like tailgating, ruuuude but
you do you.

Be aware that you’re crashing through some norms or another?

I blame the device in a way. I can’t blame you entirely.

Your phone is a little libertarian buddy who is whispering in your ear _yeah
go for it, who’s gonna stop you, might is right._

What I mean is that your phone should be aware that it being utilised in a way
which is borderline not ok.

Perhaps it uses AI to hear and understand it is at a gig. Perhaps it uses a
built-in radar chip to understand it’s in a crowd, or the accelerometer to
detect it’s on public transport, whatever.

Then, when you go to play a video of your friend’s screaming kid at top volume
at the next table without turning the volume down, again and again and -
honestly unbelievably - again, a notification would pop up, and you would have
to tap the specially-added People Will Look Hardware Action Button to do it
anyway.

A sense of shame is purely algorithmic here.

It would have to vary by region I guess. When you travel, your phone would
have to norm switch.

I say shame, I mean your devices have politics.

There are two ways to deal with the problem of noisy tiktoks on the bus.

EITHER, as I say, we say it’s your problem: Apple and Google and Samsung and
all the rest have to put some kind of social inhibitor in the operating
system, a catch that you have to override, and that has to be required by
society, legally or by media pressure or something.

OR, alternatively, it’s my problem: if I don’t like it then it’s my job to do
something about it. And in this case we could propose that I wear AirPods with
a special kind of transparency mode – all devices should advertise to _other_
devices, using Bluetooth or something, that they’re being noisy, and my
AirPods can preferentially filter that out. A more independent and
individualist approach.

Do you see that we’re essentially talking politics here?

Devices - phones, headphones, whatever - devices are negotiating the
conflicting rights of individuals. _How_ that is done is what we call
politics.

I’m not saying that we should build politics into devices.

I’m saying that devices _already_ embody a certain politics.

Perhaps this should be debated.

Being British, of course I am suggesting that phones should, instead of their
current rugged individualistic ideology, by default moderate their behaviour
using the automatic mechanisms of social pressure, i.e. shame.

Like I say, if I don’t turn off airplane mode when in-flight, or I light up my
whole row to check my messages at a theatre, my phone should detect that, and
force me to go through a special notification.

Other people nearby should get a special tut-tut button they can tap.

So if I’m being tutted, my phone shouldn’t actually stop doing what it’s
doing, that’s my sovereign choice to be flagrant, but it should blush on my
behalf.

We will implement blushing by making the offending phone perform some complex
calculation internally which runs the battery super hard so it costs 1% or 2%
remaining energy and also the back really heats up, a hot-faced hand-held
glass slab social pariah.
