# Shower thoughts about reinventing the shower

Let’s redesign the shower.

Prompted by [this post on
X/Twitter](https://x.com/JustAnotherPM/status/1745599192351883546?s=20):
"You’re the product head for a startup that’s looking to disrupt the way
people take showers. What is your MVP?"

Three ideas!

Ok so my hunch behind the popularity of air fryers, and instant pot before
that, is that people are renting more and later into life. Which changes the
living context.

When a rented home has a poor fitted stove, you can’t upgrade (the landlord
won’t let you, and you couldn’t take it with you if you did). But
simultaneously you have growing disposable income. Hence the popularity of
better _counter-top_ kitchen appliances.

How would you bring up-market showers to renters? Same way.

You’d make some kind of watertight, self-enclosed, easy-to-plumb-in _shower
booth_ that could fit in any corner. And easy to un-plumb and move to the next
place.

_Bonus points: integrated drier so you don’t need a towel._

Where you’d go next with this shower appliance, taking advantage of its high
integration, is to make it wildly efficient…

Pretty much everything that uses energy nowadays emits baseline guilt measured
in cash and carbon. Long, hot showers are a luxury paid for in concern. And
therefore avoided. _(We must ask ourselves, what is the long-term societal
consequence of a million un-thought shower thoughts.)_

So these “appliance” showers would aim to be low-background-guilt showers by
recycling heat and water for as long as you choose to soak there.

It’s similar to home solar resulting in [a feeling of energy
abundance](/home/2022/09/01/carbon): "I’ve stopped worrying about electricity
use, both economically and ethically."

_(Thanks[Nick Baum](https://www.nickbaum.com) for telling me about
[Orbital](https://www.orbital-systems.com) showers which do exactly this only
in an installed context.)_

Nespresso pod shower heads.

I can’t believe there’s not already a company giving away shower heads with a
special slot for their proprietary soap pods.

The idea being that, instead of tediously soaping yourself with shower gel,
perhaps over-soaping or missing areas, you place a single-serving pod in the
shower head which acts as a carefully calibrated dispenser, efficiently
incorporating the cleaning gel into the hot water at the appropriate moment.
Simply discard/recycle the empty pod after each shower and select another
unique soap experience tomorrow.

I mean, look, yes, this is possibly the teeniest bit evil, or at least
_distasteful,_ but it’s fun to chase these things down and see where they
lead.

Remember Juicero? The internet-connected juicer that sold single-serving juice
pods. As I said then, [it’s a channel not a
product](/home/2017/09/06/ge_and_juicero).

Channels are all about owning an extremely strong customer relationship with
integrated marketing and commerce.

So you’d build the shower channel by making a technologically _way_ better
shower head – auto-descaling, programmable dynamic, pressure, telematics
synced with Apple Health, _something something AI,_ that calibre of thing.
Then give it away.

A channel means a focus on the customer relationship. So let’s integrate free
streaming radio, maybe _shower coaches,_ Peloton-style, who relax you by
murmuringly narrating your daily exfoliation, or psyche you up for the office.

Finally, the business bit: you buy cases of pods, one-click from the app,
three dozen per variety pack.

Insert your shower gel for the day. Turn on the water.

The pods are where it’s at.

You’d have exclusive partnerships with fragrance brands.

Limited-edition collabs and drops. Dove Go Fresh (Taylor’s Version).

I think you’d lean into performance showers…

Like, you know there’s that weird connection between [the alt right and smart
drugs](https://newrepublic.com/article/154629/right-brain-ben-shapiro-alex-
jones-conservatives-love-affair-nootropics)? You’d push soap pods that are
going to make you perform better in today’s big negotiation; soap pods that
get you benching more at the gym; soap pods with trace caffeine; nootropic
soap pods that supposedly overclock your brain. Etc.

Every product needs a strong narrative hook for launch.

You could contrive some benefits of carbonating shower water, I’m 100% sure of
it…

The oxygenising effects of bubbles on the skin, for instance, leading to a
scientifically measurable decrease in seven signs of aging.

Micro cavitation, the tiny shock waves resulting from from carbonation bubble
collapse, increases surface blood flow, promoting healing. You could scare up
some lab or another to publish a paper about that I guarantee.

Hey, hyper-aerated ice cream _Halo Top_ has half the calories - because it’s
only half the ice cream - and goes hard on the healthy indulgence angle: "Stop
when you hit the bottom."

So you’d ride those health-brand coattails and _also_ talk about reduced water
usage. You’re saving money, it pays for itself.

Whatever.

Who knows whether it would do _any_ of those things. It kinda doesn’t matter.

BUT. People would talk about it. So you’re halfway there.

_You’ve heard of bubble bath. Meet the fizzy shower._

look I don’t write the copy I’m the ideas guy.

PREVIOUSLY: [Carbonating beef broth for fun and
profit.](/home/2022/12/07/gravy)
