# Social software needs to be designed with social sidetone

I feel like all social software needs the equivalent of _sidetone_ to help
[small groups](/home/2020/08/18/filtered_for_small_groups) work together.

Sidetone is the ambient sound picked up by a phone mic, and played back softly
into your ear. It’s almost imperceptible, yet, as [Wikipedia
describes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sidetone): " Absence of sidetone can
cause users to believe the call has been dropped or cause them to speak
loudly."

You don’t need sidetone to talk to someone in the same room. It’s something
that’s only required when the two of you on the call are not sharing a
physical context.

SEE ALSO: I’ve previously wondered whether [virtual reality needs a
smell](/home/2015/11/10/filtered) to keep you anchored to reality.

I’m interested in _social_ sidetone.

In this year of remote working, what social feedback is missing? What can be
provided artificially to stop a small group going off the rails?

(In a way, this is the opposite to yesterday’s post about [isolation and
divergence](/home/2020/10/07/orthogonal).)

Abstractly, what is sidetone? We could say it’s something which is

Where could social sidetone be added? Two ideas, off the top of my head.

**On a video call, when you’re speaking so you’re big on everyone else’s
screen, but everyone else is tiny so you can’t really see them…**

How about a large pair of artificial eyes that appear at the top of your
screen, staring directly at you? That would probably stop you rambling or
picking your nose.

Bonus points: make the pupils a representation of the aggregate attention of
the group. If people start to drift, the eyes droop. If someone puts their
hand up, the artificial pupils jump around to try to catch your eye.

Another!

**When you’re collaborating in a Google Doc, as a replacement for a meeting,
and for some reason it never quite gets finished.**

I’ve noticed this as a common pattern.

_And please note, for colleagues past, present, and future reading this, I am
as guilty of falling into this pattern as anyone else!_ My view is that it’s
inherent to the design of the software.

In an in-person meeting, everyone has a shared sense of when it’s early in the
meeting, such that it’s ok to bring in new ideas, and when the meeting is
coming to a close, so everyone keeps their mouth shut unless they’re tidying
things up.

We get those cues from the clocks on the wall and in our pockets, and from the
body language of other people.

Now, working on a doc together can run over a much longer period than a 1 hour
meeting, and that’s actually great – but the working group misses that shared
understanding of time, energy, impatience, whatever it is. I feel like the
working group would benefit from having a mutual _“arc,”_ however long it is.

Thinking about sport… When a game is divided into quarters, it’s pretty easy
to get a handle on the tempo the tempo. First quarter play feels different
from fourth quarter play.

So how about this:

_If you like, use DEFCON levels. (Yes I’ve talked about a website[creating
shared focus with DEFCON levels](/home/2020/09/09/organizine) before.)_

Anyway. Social sidetone. Don’t know. Could be an interesting new UX pattern
for the software we’re all living and working in today, and if you’re
designing such software then you should have this as a point to consider. Or
could be dumb.
