# Post at 20.07, on Tuesday 8 Feb 2011

There's a neat [video demo of a 3D road
generator.](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jOLhnwllpgs "Bridges, tunnels and
what-not from 2009.") The user clicks on a landscape where they want the road
to run, and the system generates architecturally sound roads, road cuts,
tunnels, bridges, and suspension bridges. I assume there's some kind of civil
engineering rules built-in. While you watch, the user shows how hills and
valleys can be introduced and automatically compensated for.

A road runs from A to B. You choose the A and the B. The system follows
engineering rules to make it work.

[Then there are city generators.](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yI5YOFR1Wus "Another video. Introversion Procedural City Generator Tech Demo.") I don't
know what rules this is following. Not engineering constraints, but the
observed laws of cities: that high residential land value tends to happen
where there are good views; that high commercial land value tends to have tall
buildings; that cities are organised into hubs with major roads for spokes;
and so on. (I'm guessing on the rules.)

Another city generator: [Suicidator City Generator
screenshots.](http://arnaud.ile.nc/sce/screenshots.php "Gorgeous.")

Also, in a funny kind of way, this [retro city which is also a mobile phone
interface:](http://www.ustwo.co.uk/case_study/pixel-city/ "Pixel City by
ustwo.") "the panel is a living, breathing portal to help the user fully
interact with their mobile phone handset. As a user pans through the
cityscape, all the different elements link to the functionality of the user’s
phone. Text messages appear playfully on billboards, calendar events arrive by
train, a passing airplane shows your call history and much more."

I don't know what appeals to me. Some combination of these three things:
autonomous simulation; toy to fiddle with; randomness but realness.

_Virtual pets and virtual people_

I get a similar feeling with [virtual
pets](http://www.virtualpet.com/vp/links/links.htm "List of loads of virtual
pets.") \- that is, toys like
[Tamagotchi](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tamagotchi "The original virtual pet
on a keyring.") \- and computer games like [Animal
Crossing](http://interconnected.org/home/2006/01/28/i_am_genmon "I love Animal
Crossing.") (a virtual life in a little town with artificially intelligence
animal friends) and [Little Computer People](http://www.next-
gen.biz/features/the-making-of-little-computer-people "Making-Of article.") (a
virtual fellow who lives in a house inside your computer, from 1985).

It's that feeling again -- the feeling that there's another world just beyond
the looking glass, something alive, but simple enough that it doesn't feel
entirely independent from me. What is this, some kind of mix of separateness
but ownership, a god complex?

A couple of appearances in fiction: Superman's miniature city-in-a-bottle,
[Kandor;](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kandor "Do they develop technology
faster than the outside, or do they move really slowly?") Philip K. Dick's
hobby build-an-earth-in-a-bubble
[Worldcraft.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Trouble_with_Bubbles "Scarily
close to reality.")

The space trading computing game _Elite_ would simulate entire _galaxies..._
and on computers from 1982, what's more. [Get
this:](http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2003/oct/18/features.weekend "Feature
about Elite.") "Their first idea had been to furnish the machine with the
details of (say) 10 solar systems they'd lovingly handcrafted in advance:
elegant stars, advantageously distributed, orbited by nice planets in
salubrious locations, inhabited by contrasting aliens with varied governments
and interesting commodities to trade. But it quickly became clear that the
wodge of data involved was going to make an impossible demand on memory. ...
What if, they asked themselves, they got the machine to invent the map as
well? To avoid the storage problem, it would need to build solar systems on
the fly; that is, it would have to come up with names and distances and
dimensions right when they were called for, that instant, rather than pulling
them out of memory. Yet these unstored, instantaneous inventions also needed
to be solid and dependable. Stars and planets needed to stay where they were
put." And so that's what they did.

_Sim social network_

Which brings me to something I once wanted: an artificial, generated social
network, where I am the only real person. I wrote about it in 2006, in a story
called [They follow each other on the
wind.](http://masochuticon.com/2006/03/29/ "Masochuticon!") A device called
_MyPeopleGalaxy._ Here's a bit of it:

"It is a shiny blue pocket-sized $20 blogging device with artificial
intelligence and a whopping big hard drive. All I did was start blogging into
it. It took my words, and the clever stuff the fella did wove those words, and
manipulated them and whatever else, and over time it learned English. And
after a while more, it started simulating more bloggers who moved in one by
one by one. Fake ones. _2 million bloggers in my pocket._"

A little bit more: "In MyPeopleGalaxy, your blog posts are shaken into words
and recombine into comments to your posts, and other blogs are inspired by
yours. You can see echoes of your vocabulary and ideas in the blogs that
surround you. This is the best of artificial prose pioneered by the spam email
people, taken and used to generate fake journal posts for 14 year-olds. Good
grief. I couldn’t put it down."

And you know what? I still want it. Simulations of people, all with individual
names, personalities and interests, tens of thousands of them, all generated.
It shouldn't be too hard: there's already a record of each of us in some
marketing database somewhere. Just roll the dice on that and invent people who
don't exist.

And all of them with their own Facebook pages, and their own status updates,
and their own friends lists, and their own blogs. All in their own big social
network. _That_ shouldn't be too hard either -- I can barely tell the
difference between generated spam and real websites and email nowadays, so the
technology must exist.

And I want them all making friends, falling out, going through the whole
lifecycle of relationships, copying jokes and links off each other, getting
obsessed with virals, watching YouTube, reading the news, all the rest, all of
it, every single bit of it. All generated, all artificial, a colossal baroque
folly. I reckon it'd be pretty easy to do.

An ant farm that I can watch. A soap opera with 10,000 computer-controlled
software actors.

And _I_ want to have a profile right there too, on Fakebook, the only real
person of the lot of them. Single player socialising. It's horrible, I get
that, a kind of pornography but of friendship and attachment. But I reckon
it'd be fun to play, crazy addictive, and I have a hunch there would be some
interesting spin-off applications. Toy mirror worlds.
