# Post at 09.20, on Tuesday 29 Jan 2008

[SimCity on the
OLPC](http://weblogs.asp.net/bsimser/archive/2008/01/10/simcity-source-code-
released-to-the-wild-let-the-ports-begin.aspx "Announcement."), letting kids
dig around with the dynamic system rules. [Download
Micropolis](http://www.donhopkins.com/home/micropolis/ "Looks like it's going
to get some attention to, to make the code more flexible.") (its screenname in
the open source world), and [read
more](http://www.donhopkins.com/drupal/taxonomy_menu/4/49/66 "Don Hopkins and
his plans for SimCity/Micropolis."). I'd like this hooked into my todo list to
have different districts as different projects, with the attention I give each
manifesting as land value.

Visit [Deyemon, my mini city](http://deyemon.myminicity.com/ "I'm not tricking
you into going there. But I might.") which runs online like a simplified
SimCity. The more referrer traffic it gets, the higher the population. I can
encourage you to visit other URLs to improve its industry, transport network,
and so on.

A [viral loop](http://andrewchen.typepad.com/andrew_chens_blog/2007/07/whats-
your-vira.html "Explained with reference to Facebook.") is "the steps a user
goes through between entering the site to inviting the next set of new users"
([more](http://enterpriserss.typepad.com/enterprise_rss/2008/01/if-superpoke-
is.html "On widgets.")). The viral loop leads to: motivated users; growth;
mutuality between websites in the ecosystem. By happy coincidence, [I'll be
speaking on a similar topic at the end of the
week](http://north08.webdirections.org/schedule/#webb "Motivation
flowcharts.").

The [OLPC Human Interface
Guidelines](http://wiki.laptop.org/go/OLPC_Human_Interface_Guidelines "An
excellent document.") concentrates not on applications but activities. ([Run
OLPC without an XO laptop.](http://chanson.livejournal.com/180680.html "The XO
is the name of the laptop. You'll need VMWare, which I don't have.")) cf.
[Human Interface Guidelines for Mac OS X 10.5
Leopard](http://developer.apple.com/documentation/UserExperience/Conceptual/OSXHIGuidelines/XHIGIntro/chapter_1_section_1.html "Not terribly conceptual, but that's no bad thing.").

[Rumoured gestures for inclusion in Windows Mobile
7.](http://microsoft.blognewschannel.com/archives/2008/01/06/exclusive-
windows-mobile-7-to-focus-on-touch-and-motion-gestures "Could be, could be.")

The [Internet of 1996](http://www.msu.edu/~karjalae/internet96.htm?hoho "Unnecessarily snarky, but redeemed by the pictures.") shows just how much is
dependent not on the technology, but on the people making stuff figuring out
where the grain is. Once upon a time, the entire Web was [mapped in 3D to the
continent of
antarcti.ca](http://www.siteselection.com/ssinsider/webpick/wp010101.htm "I'm
not kidding. It used to kill my computer. The power of XML! But it's true,
this was really hard before XML.").

[Maintain eye contact to feel
powerful.](http://www.esquire.com/features/ESQ0806INFLUENCE_81 "The Invisible
Grip. By Tom Chiarella.") [Keith Johnstone](http://www.keithjohnstone.com/ "Improvisation teacher.") in _Impro_ has a different view: "breaking eye
contact can be high status so long as you don't immediately glance back for a
fraction of a second. ... status is established not by staring, but by the
reaction to staring. Thus dark glasses raise status because we can't see the
submission of the eyes."

Johnstone also says "the best ideas are often psychotic, obscene and
unoriginal"\--it's in adulthood that we're trained to suppress these. Go for
it, he says. Right on.

[Copy someone else staring at the camera and making a gesture, then post it to
YouTube](http://youtube.com/video_response_view_all?v=kib05Ip6GSo "YouTube
meme, best ever.") [[via](http://www.kottke.org/08/01/uncomfortable-
goggleeyed-staring-silence-plus-finger-gesture-oddness-meme "Title says it
better than I could.")]. Now get a [tentacle
arm](http://www.gaiastore.com/servlet/Detail?no=221 "Actually I'd quite like
one of these. It's my birthday soon. Anyone?").

Three thoughts:

Right. I'm off to Canada.
