# Singing bridges

I am of course delighted that in San Francisco, [the Golden Gate Bridge is
singing](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2020/jun/06/golden-gate-bridge-
san-francisco-sings) like a giant ethereal harp, because it makes me wonder
what it’s saying, and about the voices of other transport infrastructure, and
what they would sing about too.

[Here’s another recording of the singing
bridge.](https://twitter.com/markkrueg/status/1269073081231740928)

(The sound reminds me of [this demo of the Cristal
Baschet](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9RZg-AP3zM8) which is a glass “harp”
invented in France in 1952, and it gives me SHIVERS.)

So how would it sound for an office tower to sing? And what voice would it
have?

Or an airport? Or a wind farm?

How about a road? If you put your ear to the asphalt, would you hear it
whispering about what’s happening at the other end, 500 miles away?

I’m reminded of Tom Armitage [bringing Tower Bridge to life in
tweets](https://infovore.org/archives/2008/02/28/making-bridges-talk/): "I am
opening for the MV Dixie Queen, which is passing down riverstream."

BUT

I’m also pretty taken with the idea that we _don’t_ know what the Golden Gate
Bridge is singing about, other than it being windy. It tickles me that the
bridge has its own internal life that leads it to sing, but it’s no more
speaking to us than a blackbird. Why should the bridge _want_ to tell us
anything? _And why would we be able to understand it if it did?_

What’s appealing is the scale difference and the parallel lives. In regular
life, the bridge is subject to human concerns. But if we’re quiet, and we make
some room, this sleeping giant dreams, and we can hear it talking in its
sleep.

A city, but the [Music of the
Spheres](https://www.auroraorchestra.com/2019/05/28/pythagoras-the-music-of-
the-spheres/):

If earthly objects such as strings or pieces of metal make sounds when put in
motion, so too must the Moon, the planets, the Sun and even the highest stars.
As these heavenly objects are forever in motion, orbiting the Earth, surely
they must be forever producing sound.

(Says Pythagoras.)

I’m currently lost in a bit of a wikihole reading about the music of the
spheres, the [musica
universalis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Musica_universalis), and it turns
out this is only one of _three_ branches of “musica”:

So, a fourth brand, a _musica city?_ Not cosmic but earthbound. The music of
the human-created but somehow bigger than us?

If you’ve never been to **The Monument** in London, it’s a thin stone tower
with a spiral staircase inside to reach the top, about 300 steps, and it was
tall when it was completed in 1677 to commemorate the Great Fire. (Now it’s in
a square mostly surrounded by office blocks.) [Here are some
pics.](https://www.themonument.info)

The staircase is hollow from top to bottom. You can see straight down as you
circle round, which always gives me the heebie jeebies.

It turns out the entire thing was architected to double up as a [telescope to
measure the parallax of the
stars](https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20170810-the-medieval-lab-hidden-
inside-a-famous-monument), lenses attached 200 ft apart across the cylindrical
void.

And I remember reading somewhere that Christopher Wren (the new St Paul’s
Cathedral) and Robert Hooke (him of the law of elasticity, and also architect)
conceived of the post-Fire, rebuilt London as a landscape of mega-instruments,
buildings simultaneously for people and also for the scientific contemplation
of nature.

So maybe that would be the song of our cities, if only we could hear it.
