# A slow savings account

Pensions have a very particular schedule. You pay in to the same plan - at a
rate of 10% or more over a large chunk of your career - and it starts paying
out at a fixed point: at age 55, or 60, or whatever.

It seems to me that a pension’s particular schedule should instead be one end
of a spectrum, the other end of which is credit cards and savings accounts.
And then we should fill in that spectrum.

See, savings accounts are a way of putting a little bit of money aside for a
big future purchase or a “rainy day.” Unemployment insurance does the same
job, but it has a fixed pay-out trigger.

Savings accounts, unemployment insurance, and pensions are all ways to smooth
out spikes in income over time.

A credit card provides for smoothness too, only it smooths out _income_ spikes
into the _past_ whereas a savings account or a pension smooths out income
spikes into the future. There are also fixed term investment vehicles with tax
benefits.

I wonder whether there’s another kind of income smoothness service, one
possible only with modern computerised record-keeping?

I’ve been using [Twitshift,](http://www.twitshift.com/) which lets me follow
myself from a year ago on Twitter. I get to see all the things I was doing and
thinking from 365 days in the past. [Timehop](http://timehop.com/) does a
similar job, but across lots of social media. I like the continuous, day-by-
day nature of it.

Also I think a little about Bob Shaw’s concept of [slow
glass](http://strick.net/blog/041103.html) which is "glass that is so opaque
that light takes as long as ten years to pass through it. From a practical
standpoint, then, if you looked through a window made of slow glass, you’d see
events that took place outside that window ten years ago."

_I would like a slow savings account._

A slow savings account would work exactly like a regular account – I could pay
money into it, and transfer money out. The difference would be: _when I pay
money in to a slow savings account, it appears in the available balance
exactly one year later._

Additional slow savings models might include:

A slow savings account would be the exact opposite of a credit card: it
distributes present income into the future, instead of borrowing from the
future; it deals with assets instead of liabilities; it encourages smooth
spending instead of enabling large spike purchases; it raises the level of the
safety net instead of raising the level of indebtedness.
