# Two positive signals for the Smart Home

I’m bullish on the Smart Home, and as someone with a [professional interest in
the Internet of Things](https://www.rgaiot.com) who was consumer-IoT-shy this
time last year, I’ve been thinking about what changed my mind.

This isn’t a whitepaper, or a even a properly considered analysis: just some
notes about where my head’s at and what I’m looking at. I’d appreciate
feedback — both supporting points (especially pointers to UK startups who are
taking advantage of these trends) and counter-examples. If I’m off-base I’d
like to know!

Over the last couple years, the Smart Home has been getting a bad rap.
Connected consumer products suffer for a bunch of reasons, including but not
inclusively:

All of that said, this year I’m getting excited about consumer Internet of
Things again. There are a few trends that make it easier for the Smart Home to
get out its slump, such as the ever-increasing acceptability of e-commerce and
direct sales, which reclaims the retailer margin.

But two signals in particular.

The first signal is [smart lighting from
Ikea](http://www.ikea.com/gb/en/products/lighting/smart-lighting/) which both
fulfils the promise of a low-cost modular system, and also has sane
interaction design (that is: it includes physical controls and works when the
internet is absent).

More importantly it [works with a gamut of Smart Home
controls:](https://www.wired.com/story/ikea-smart-home/) Apple HomeKit, Google
Assistant, and Amazon Alexa. This tells me that the GAFA stacks _(aside: where
is Facebook in the Smart Home?)_ have given up on their unrealistic desire to
treat the home as a monolithic own-able platform. The layers are emerging: it
will soon be possible for a startup to innovate on a new type of bulb without
having to also break into the service layer (and yes, I’ve met companies with
internet-connected bulbs showing a 10x life at comparable cost. Being able to
plug-and-play HomeKit, Assistant, and Alexa would be a godsend for them).

At the service layer, it should also become possible to innovate on software
and orchestration between devices: I look forward to services that are able to
plug in to a smart home from a mix of manufacturers, providing highly specific
and differentiated functionality. I think voice has a part to play here: it’s
the excuse we’ve been looking for to put our phones down at home.

Interop is good news: more ways in for startups, more places to innovate, and
better value for consumers.

The second signal is also a healthy emerging fracture point in the connected
hardware stack: [Qualcomm’s reference designs, including this speaker
platform.](https://www.qualcomm.com/news/releases/2017/06/14/qualcomm-
announces-highly-flexible-smart-speaker-platform-unique) Reference designs
allow for some interesting manufacturer efficiencies. A small company can go
and ask for a customised version of this product, benefiting from a supply
chain shared with other small companies, and with engineering costs amortised
across the same.

The reference design linked above is for a smart speaker. A speaker is no
longer just a speaker: it’s a speaker with directional microphones, a wi-fi
connection to a cloud somewhere, and enough on-board GPU to run a voice
assistant, whether that’s from Apple or Google. I’m interested to see what the
equivalent reference designs are for a smart screen, smart doorlock, smart
book, and so on.

If these appear, it will show that the consumer categories for smart products
are stabilising. Categories are useful because they allow the rest of the
industry to align: retail buyers can set up aisles; marketing educates the
consumer; it becomes worthwhile for distributors to do their thing. With a
baseline of many products in the same category, it becomes possible to
experiment.

Critically reference designs provide an entry point to startups that lets them
mimic Apple’s business model: "hardware differentiated by software." To date
this has been inaccessible to startups because hardware development is a huge
barrier to overcome before service innovation can begin (not to mention the
challenge of distribution). The table stakes are, happily, coming down.

Overall the Internet of Things is going to see an interesting few years. The
digital world has seen rapid change: Blockchain, A.I. (in a thousand forms),
and next generation interfaces too: voice and augmented reality. The recently
stabilised IoT tech stack is pretty solid: digital dividends should be coming
into the real world much faster than before.

And then, maybe, _finally,_ we’ll start seeing those category-busting
transformative products that we’ve been waiting for.
