# Social Attention: a modest prototype in shared presence

Right now the web is either fully social, like when you’re collaborating in
Google Docs, or it’s a solitary experience. There’s very little between. Yes
you do sometimes get moments that are _almost_ social, like when you read a
product review on Amazon or a comment on a blog post, but it’s like walking
into a room that somebody’s just left: there’s a note on the table, and the
door on the far end is closing shut.

My take is that the web could feel warmer and more lively than it is. Visiting
a webpage could feel a little more like visiting a park and watching the world
go by. Visiting my homepage could feel just a tiny bit like stopping by my
home.

And so to celebrate my [blogging streak](/home/2020/09/10/streak) reaching one
year, this week, I’m adding a proof of concept to my blog, something I’m
provisionally calling _Social Attention._

**[Here are some screenshots](/more/2021/03/social-attention)** if you want to
see how it works without jumping in right now.

**Then:** select some text, as if you’re going to copy it.

Your selection will be shared automatically with all the other people on the
same page as you. It will appear for them as highlighted words. It’s all
anonymous. Your data isn’t stored.

If somebody else selects some text, it’ll be highlighted for you. But if
you’re not on the same page at the same time, you’ll never see it. It only
works in realtime.

If you want to experiment with this, use two completely different browsers, or
have one window in private/incognito mode. The system has to believe that
you’re different people otherwise the selection won’t be shared.

_(I don’t know how long I’ll keep this running for. It’s a prototype, and I
haven’t given a huge amount of thought to scaling – and there are limits on
the free tier of the service I’m using as the back-end for the notifications.
So if it doesn’t work for you, check out the screenshots instead.)_

How often have you been on the phone with a friend, trying to describe how to
get somewhere online? Okay go to Amazon. Okay type in _“whatever”._ Okay, it’s
the third one down for me…

This is ridiculous!

What if, instead, you both went to the website and then you could just say:
_follow me._

You know each other! You’re speaking on the phone together! Computers should
be aware of this fact! _Of course_ if you go to the same website, you should
be able to see each other there.

We don’t need to be so sophisticated right now. There’s no need for my blog to
be a fully private space, but there’s also no reason for it to be fully
public. We can share just a hint of data, enough for a sense of liveness, but
otherwise keep it anonymous.

If I’m in a meeting, I should be able to share a link in the chat to a
particular post on my blog, then select the paragraph I’m talking about and
have it highlighted for everyone. Well, now I can.

And yes, I know that _Medium_ and _Amazon Kindle_ share text highlights, but
that happens only once it has been highlighted – I want something that lets
you see life on the other side of the screen. Especially because it becomes
suddenly more useful when you’re coordinating with someone else in a different
channel. And, yes, of course there are more fully transparent systems like
live cursors or annotations… but this is a blog and not a chatroom. I want the
patina of fingerprints, the quiet and comfortable background hum of a library.

Modern animal life appeared pretty much all at once, 541 million years ago, in
an event called the Cambrian explosion. Why? There’s a theory that, at that
time, [the oceans cleared of dust](/notes/2006/02/scifi/?p=21). Suddenly it
was possible to _see,_ and complex tactics like hunting, camouflage,
deduction, and so on triggered an arms race that led to the evolution of the
animals that we have today.

I think about that story a lot, because in the real world we rely on what we
can see for so much tacit, realtime knowledge. If you’re in a meeting, you
silently and unconsciously coordinate who is speaking next by constantly
glancing. If you’re in an unfamiliar town, you know which restaurants are
popular without going in… by looking.

When the social web kicked off in the early 2000s, it felt to me like the
oceans were clearing. And, yes, we did get a little of the “wisdom of the
crowds.” Product reviews… blog posts… Wikipedia… Then later, the full-on
collaborative experience of Google Docs or Figma.

What I’d like more of is a social web that sits between these two extremes,
something with a small town feel. So you can see people are around, and you
can give directions and a friendly nod, but there’s no need to stop and chat,
and it’s not in your face. [It’s what I’ve talked about before as social
peripheral vision](/home/2020/11/20/social_os) (that post is about why it
should be build into the OS).

It’s what video games have gotten so right. There’s the crowd, which is semi-
anonymous, and there are your friends. You can scale visibility and
interactivity as appropriate.

There’s no reason that Social Attention shouldn’t a one-liner to add to _any_
website, or part of the browser itself. Maybe it should be part of a suite of
social tools to make the web a well-lit, neighbourly place – with, naturally,
good privacy-preserving fences.

(If you can think of a way to support this kind of effort, do get in touch. I
feel like the web has some missing infrastructure here.)

I’m enjoying writing here, and I can’t believe I’ve kept up this current
streak for a whole year. Thank you for reading.

This is my homepage. Welcome to my home.
