# These robot legs are made for walkin’ me to the shops

Exoskeletons quietly got good while I wasn’t looking?

FOR INSTANCE, LEGS:

Hangzhou RoboCT Technology Development Co. [raised series A funding earlier
this year](https://www.therobotreport.com/roboct-brings-in-15m-for-robotic-
exoskeletons/): "RoboCT’s UGO exoskeleton robot is a rehabilitation robot that
helps patients who experience motor dysfunction in the lower body learn how to
walk."

100,000 UGO exoskeletons are already in market.

There are also passive exoskeletons.
[Ottobock](https://ottobockexoskeletons.com) has a series of unpowered
exoskeletons that redistribute weight, for use in the logistics space. e.g.
squatting, lifting, carrying are all easier.

Powered again: [these active
exoskeletons](https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202101/1212636.shtml), in use by
the Chinese military (2021), list similar micro-benefits:

Exoskeletons don’t address use cases but instead **augment,** and I mean this
in the Engelbart/Licklider sense.

_To unpack that:_

From Douglas Engelbart’s [Augmenting Human
Intellect](https://dougengelbart.org/content/view/138) (1962) which is the
approach that led his team to invent the personal computer: "Every process of
thought or action is made up of sub-processes." – for example: finding,
copying, re-arranging, and filing text.

It’s a solid approach! Identify and speed up the sub-processes, then the tasks
look after themselves. _(Very different from today’s world of end-to-end task-
focused service design, say.)_

Engelbart was following J. C. R. Licklider who made the original conceptual
breakthrough after introspecting on his own work. In his paper _Man-Computer
Symbiosis_ (1960):

In the spring and summer of 1957, therefore, I tried to keep track of what one
moderately technical person actually did during the hours he regarded as
devoted to work. …

_About 85 per cent of my “thinking” time was spent getting into a position to
think_ , to make a decision, to learn something I needed to know. Much more
time went into finding or obtaining information than into digesting it. Hours
went into the plotting of graphs, and other hours into instructing an
assistant how to plot. When the graphs were finished, the relations were
obvious at once, but the plotting had to be done in order to make them so. …

Throughout the period I examined, in short, _my “thinking” time was devoted
mainly to activities that were essentially clerical_ or mechanical: searching,
calculating, plotting, transforming, determining the logical or dynamic
consequences of a set of assumptions or hypotheses, preparing the way for a
decision or an insight.

The bottleneck to progress is not smart people, it is what is _easy:_ "my
choices of what to attempt and what not to attempt were determined to an
embarrassingly great extent by considerations of clerical feasibility, not
intellectual capability."

This is a stunning result!

If you augment the sub-processes, not only are tasks achieved more
efficiently, but you increase the surface area of the adjacent possible!

And it’s the conceptual rhyming that underpins my interest in exoskeletons:
what is opened up by augmenting sub-processes of the physical self?

_(To round out the story above: Licklider inspired Engelbart; Licklider funded
Engelbart based on that paper in his capacity as director at ARPA; Engelbart’s
team invented the PC.[I wrote a potted history last
year.](/home/2021/12/21/sage))_

_What are the civilian applications?_

[The last time I was on about cyborg
prosthetics](/home/2020/04/07/cyborg_prosthetics) (2020) I said I wanted a
chairless chair but for gardening.

I’m still waiting! If you can get an active exoskeleton for squatting with a
drill on the assembly line, then give me my powerloader to empty the
dishwasher dammit.

Like: eyeglasses were lame essentials and then they became fashion. I’m sure
that exoskeleton knees to redistribute weight so I can more easily lift the
sofa while hoovering would end up being cool. Somehow.

Let’s not overlook AI. There’s the possibility of _do-what-I-mean_ interaction
that should let exoskeletons and other prosthesis fit right into everyday
life.

FOR EXAMPLE: why not an extra arm that I strap round my chest, and I can use
the extra hand to just… hold stuff.

Let’s say my 3rd hand can hold a mug of tea without spilling it as I go up and
down the stairs, arms full with other stuff, and hand it back gracefully when
I go to take it. Why _wouldn’t_ I have that on me the whole time?

Anyway I prefer **somaforming** to cyborgs nowadays.

Clynes and Kline’s _“cyborg”_ concept from 1960 was derived from transforming
humans into half-human, half-machine hybrids to survive the hostile
environment of space ([here’s the
history](/home/2020/05/20/cyborgs_and_emotions)).

But sci-fi author Becky Chambers, in her 2019 novella _To Be Taught, If
Fortunate_ proposes something else: "Somaforming is an elegant solution, but
not an immediate process." – somewhat akin to a patch that produces insulin.

We don’t change much – nothing that would make us unrecognisable, nothing that
would push us beyond the realm of our humanity, nothing that changes how I
think or act or perceive.

It’s a take on cyborging which emphasises the contingent, the temporary and
partial, the human and the body; the process, the versatility…

Somaforming for space? How about somaforming for everyday life.

It’s a framing that unlocks the imagination for me in a way that thinking
about cyborg prostheses doesn’t so much.

Look: the exoskeleton challenge is no longer technology. It’s what we do and
how.

And if we’re looking into the adjacent possible, then perhaps it’s _more
plausible_ from a consumer product R&D perspective to chase down robot
trousers than robot cars. Why not, why not?

Don’t give me autonomous vehicle cocoons to get me far away –

– give me augmented legs to make it easier to hang out in my neighbourhood; to
carry the shopping and spend more time in the fresh air and greeting people I
pass; to cover ground with ease, to pay attention near traffic for me, to let
me reply to an email or two on the hoof if I need to…

To somaform me for the walkable city.
