# Post at 12.49, on Friday 15 Feb 2008

Some pictures:

TorrentFreedom have built their service to never store any data which could be
used for identification. In a pleasant turn of phrase, they call it
[structural anonymity](http://torrentfreak.com/torrentfreedom-offers-
anonymous-and-unrestricted-bittorrent-080208/ "Interview."): "We built the
system from day one so that there's no correlation between an IP+timestamp and
a username - this means we can't hand over logs of 'who was on what IP at what
time' ... Our payment system is fully abstracted from the operational
environment - billing events are passed to the VPN engine via temporary
'tokens' that are one-way-factors ... we don't have 'server logs' like
everyone else does ... all of our operational VMs run in fully-encrypted
partitions."

[Space smells
metallic.](http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/station/crew/exp6/spacechronicles4.html "I wonder what molecule is triggering that.")

[The law of unintended consequences is what happens when a simple system tries
to regulate a complex
system.](http://www.marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2008/01/the-law-
of-unin.html "Cybernetics!") See also, from cybernetics, [the Law of Requisite
Variety](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/REQVAR.html "Ashby's Law.").

Jason Kottke has collected [videos showing multiple time periods at
once.](http://www.kottke.org/08/02/time-merge-media "Watch them all.") He
pulls a quote: "But, we can kind of think of the multi-playthrough Kaizo Mario
World video as a silly, sci-fi style demonstration of the Quantum Suicide
experiment. At each moment of the playthrough there's a lot of different
things Mario could have done, and almost all of them lead to horrible death.
The anthropic principle, in the form of the emulator's save/restore feature,
postselects for the possibilities where Mario actually survives and ensures
that although a lot of possible paths have to get discarded, the camera
remains fixed on the one path where after one minute and fifty-six seconds
some observer still exists."

I think of it somewhat like [ray-
tracing](http://www.superjer.com/pixelmachine/ "A ray-tracer built over a
weekend.") an interactive space. Each player is a ray of light fired into the
black box of the game world, bouncing off interaction possibilities
differently each time. The integral of all the consequences gives the shape of
the interaction surface. Then perhaps [a diagram can be
produced](http://www.theoryoffun.com/grammar/gdc2005.htm "The follow-up to
Koster's 'Theory of Fun'."). (It's only be looking at parallel universes side-
by-side that the contingency of a particular event or counterfactual can be
ascertained. That is, you can't know from a single game whether a move was
'hard' or 'lucky'.)

As video games get trickier to learn - because learning is fun - they'll hit a
point where it's as fast to get good at real-life skateboarding than it is to
get good in-game. [What an odd
singularity.](http://plum.he.net/~pspinrad/writing/sex-singularity.htm "The
Sex Singularity: When Machines Surpass Human Hotness") The choice for the
player then becomes, where can I find the best teacher?

[What would Richard Feynman
do?](http://www.wellingtongrey.net/miscellanea/archive/2006-12-25-what-would-
richard-feynman-do.html "Flowchart.")
