# Space, weather, and other novel battlegrounds

I learnt about the concept of "spacepower" today after [hearing about this new
book](https://twitter.com/bleddb/status/1277889227070623744): **War in Space:
Strategy, Spacepower, Geopolitics.**

The [publisher description](https://edinburghuniversitypress.com/book-war-in-
space.html) has more detail, and this isn’t a speculative topic: "As
satellites have become essential for modern warfare, strategists are asking
whether the next major war will begin or be decided in outer space."

But it’s this perspective shift that really sniped me:

Bleddyn E. Bowen applies the wisdom of military strategy to outer space and
presents a compelling new vision of **Earth’s orbit as a coastline,** rather
than an open ocean or an extension of airspace as many have assumed.

Then there’s the weather.

[Bernard Vonnegut](http://www.atmos.albany.edu/daes/bvonn/bvonnegut.html)
_(Kurt Vonnegut’s brother)_ was a chemist who discovered in 1946 "the
effectiveness of silver iodide as ice-forming nuclei that has been widely used
to seed clouds in efforts to augment rainfall."

And the success of cloud seeding and the nuclear arms race led to the **UN
Weather Weapon Treaty** (1976) which banned "environmental modification
techniques" for military purposes. [AS PREVIOUSLY DISCUSSED ON THIS
BLOG:](/home/2011/01/12/hypnotism_act)

Imagine attacking New York with an artificial earthquake. Or a hyper-
thunderstorm. … Tabletop volcanos! Genetically modified tomatoes that create
their own microclimate! Pocket clouds!

Anyway.

I recently across this paper called [Weather as a Force Multiplier: Owning the
Weather in
2025](https://www.cftc.gov/sites/default/files/idc/groups/public/@lrfederalregister/documents/frcomment/08-004c002.pdf)
(pdf) by _Col_ whatnot and _Lt Col_ someone or other and _Maj_ you get the
idea. Opening lines: "2025 is a study designed to comply with a directive from
the chief of staff of the Air Force to examine the concepts, capabilities, and
technologies the United States will require to remain the dominant air and
space force in the future."

It starts off pretty rationally:

The application of weather-modification technology to clear a hole over the
targets long enough for F-117s to attack and place bombs on target or clear
the fog from the runway at Tuzla would have been a very effective force
multiplier.

This paper was written in **1996** – or… maybe? I honestly can’t figure out
the provenance of this document. It pops up a lot on geoengineering conspiracy
theory websites.

There’s a decent science-fiction-y section. Lethal drone clouds!

Nanotechnology also offers possibilities for creating simulated weather. A
cloud, or several clouds, of microscopic computer particles, all communicating
with each other and with a larger control system could provide tremendous
capability. Interconnected, atmospherically buoyant, and having navigation
capability in three dimensions, such clouds could be designed to have a wide-
range of properties. They might exclusively block optical sensors or could
adjust to become impermeable to other surveillance methods. They could also
provide an atmospheric electrical potential difference, which otherwise might
not exist, to achieve precisely aimed and timed lightning strikes

Then there are codices tacked on the end that veer into artificial earthquakes
produced by lost technology invented by Nikola Tesla. So, make of it what you
will.

I can’t remember the first time I heard of **cyberwar** but I do recall that
it sounded fantastical.

Then came [Stuxnet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stuxnet), "a malicious
computer worm, first uncovered in 2010, thought to have been in development
since at least 2005."

Stuxnet silently spread between computers and USB flash drives until it
reached the logic controllers for gas centrifuges in Iran – used to refine
nuclear material. At which point it activated, and "Stuxnet reportedly ruined
almost one-fifth of Iran’s nuclear centrifuges."

Probably a state-created cyberweapon, nobody has taken responsibility for it.

I guess what I’m just realising is that, at some point, _someone_ had to
realise that “cyberwar” could be a thing.

And what was that process like, exactly? Did some bright kid write a memo that
got the attention of the boss and the boss’ boss? Did the FBI arrest a hacker,
[WarGames](https://www.wired.com/2008/07/ff-wargames/)-style, then bring them
in and ask them what they’d do? Is there a _“warfare innovation”_ team that
churns out 100 ideas a year, and they get a bonus if one of them catches the
eye of management?

Are there “new battleground” conferences that generals go to, populated with
the familiar indsutry conference staples of tedious panel discussions and
rubbish wi-fi and bad coffee?

And now of course [we’ve got 77th
Brigade](https://www.wired.co.uk/article/inside-the-77th-brigade-britains-
information-warfare-military): "They are the troops fighting Britain’s
information wars."

I _know_ this is a bleak thought, but - prompted by the idea that there are
people who, professionally, gaze up at the clouds in the sky and think “oh, we
could fight whole countries with that” - I wonder what else they’ve come up
with?

And one other thought: I wonder how much of this has already happened?
