# A strange loop involving Brian Eno and the nature of time

In 1962, Douglas Engelbart writes his paper [Augmenting Human Intellect: A
Conceptual Framework](https://www.dougengelbart.org/content/view/138), his
theory of human progress based on human-computer cooperation. In 1968,
Engelbart and his team present [The Mother of All
Demos](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mother_of_All_Demos) where, famously,
in 90 minutes, they show off bitmapped graphics, hypertext, video
conferencing, [modern office furniture](/home/2020/11/30/furniture), and the
mouse, thus inaugurating the era of the personal computer.

[Look to the side](https://invention.si.edu/mother-all-demos) (search for
_“The ARC team rehearses”_ on that page for the photo): operating the camera
is Stewart Brand.

In the 1960s and over the following decades, Brand starts a number of projects
and organisations dedicated to thinking and working collectively. The "Why
haven’t we see a photograph of the whole Earth yet?" campaign, to help us
think as a planetary level; the Whole Earth Catalog, to share knowledge and
tools across the countercultural communes of North America; the Whole Earth
‘Lectronic Link, one of the first online social spaces; and in 1996, the [Long
Now Foundation](https://longnow.org).

The Long Now Foundation is building a clock which will last 10,000 years, and
is named for the concept of the “long now” coined by Brian Eno, one of its co-
founders, [in an essay in January 1995](https://longnow.org/essays/big-here-
long-now/): "The Long Now is the recognition that the precise moment you’re in
grows out of the past and is a seed for the future."

(Eno is a theorist and musician and pioneered ambient music [after being hit
by a taxi in
1975](http://music.hyperreal.org/artists/brian_eno/interviews/nme77a.html#Darkness).
Recuperating, he couldn’t stand up and adjust the volume on the stereo – music
became part of the environment, a new thing.)

**Meanwhile:**

Engelbart’s colleagues go on to Xerox PARC. The Xerox Alto becomes the first
commercial computer with a mouse; the Xerox Star the first with the modern
desktop user interface. Steve Jobs sees the Star, and then the Apple Macintosh
popularises both the desktop interface and the mouse. Catching up, Microsoft
releases Windows 95 with massive publicity in August 1995, it is a huge
success, and the mouse finally goes mainstream.

The startup sound for Windows 95 is six seconds long. It is iconic. _(Here it
is, with some[other interpretations](/home/2020/12/02/extrapolation).)_

The startup sound was composed by Brian Eno.

After the project, which started in 1994, Eno says:

I got completely into this world of tiny, tiny little pieces of music. I was
so sensitive to microseconds at the end of this that it really broke a logjam
in my own work. Then when I’d finished that and I went back to working with
pieces that were like three minutes long, _it seemed like oceans of time._

I don’t know of any published link between Brian Eno’s two experiences of
time, these two juxtapositions of micro and macro, both holding up a single
moment against the unfathomably larger ocean of time, other than they both
occur in 1995.

But it doesn’t feel like a coincidence that the same mind, preoccupied with
the notion, should be involved in both.

And it’s neat that these two moments, almost simultaneous in the scheme of
things, came about as a result of a single event almost 30 years earlier.

A strange loop in the history of the modern world.

I’m working on a talk at the moment: a parallel history of computing, one that
follows the exceptions and the tangents and the forgotten ideas. I’m running
it once next week and again in early June. It’s long! Right now the plan for
the one in June is to spread it out over three successive evenings, as part of
a larger conference.

(I’m going to keep presenting this talk for a while, and keep developing and
iterating the material. At a certain point I’ll publish… but not yet. Do get
in touch if it sounds like a fit for an event in which you’re involved.)

One of the joys of researching the talk, and joining the dots, is discovering
for myself coincidences like this. New ways to tell old stories. So I wanted
to share this one.
