# Who owns your synthetic self?

Some glimpses…

Vtubers are virtual performers. They have their own shows on YouTube and
Twitch, just like regular humans, but they’re animated avatars. One vtuber,
Projekt Melody, "commissioned [her body] from an artist for $5,000 and even
kept the receipts as proof."

But:

the artist, alleging that Melody owed him money, filed a copyright complaint
claiming that she didn’t actually own her body – he did. Melody was banned
from Twitch.

Here’s an interesting one. [Hour One](https://www.hourone.ai) is a startup
that produces synthetic characters for use in videos.

Only the synthetic characters are all based on real-life people. You can sign
up to be a character too, if you want. I guess it’s like having all the
benefits of acting in commercials, but without having to act.

There’s a page on the website called _“Character protection.”_

Your engagement will be governed by a synthetic talent contract that we have
in place with all our characters.

Any synthetic content in which you appear will be labeled with a watermark
indicating the character’s content has been synthesized.

Hour One stores your facial assets with utmost security, so that it may not be
hacked.

And this fascinates me.

Could you object to your synthesised face appearing in a commercial for
something hateful?

Could you drop your own sex tape online, but watermark it with a _Hour One:
Synthetic Character_ watermark to give yourself plausible deniability? Who
would sue whom?

I’m interested in when you create a synthetic version of yourself for your own
purposes.

The thing is that synthetic media isn’t media as we know it - it’s not an
image, or a sound. It’s software. Software is licensed. Although it’s based on
me, it isn’t me.

Do I have a right to take my synthetic face puppet to a competing service? Can
it be used in adverts, and do I have a right to limit that? If I make a ton of
money out of it as a vtuber, does the software provider get a cut? Can a
synthetic voice be inherited? If a voice bank is hacked and a voice used to
steal money from my actual bank, who is liable?

This has already been an issue in Hollywood: "And as far back as 1998, Chinese
martial-arts superstar Jet Li turned down a role in The Matrix … for fear the
production would try to claim digital ownership of his strikes and kicks."

“[For] six months, they wanted to record and copy all my moves into a digital
library,” he told the Chinese news site Weibo in October. “By the end of the
recording, the rights to these moves would go to them. I was thinking: I’ve
been training my entire life. And we martial artists could only grow older.
Yet they could own [my moves] as an intellectual property forever. So I said I
couldn’t do that.”

So… that. For everyone, all the time.

_(Thanks[Matt Jones](https://petafloptimism.com) and [Phil
Gyford](https://www.gyford.com) for sending some of the above links my way.)_
