# We need talent identification for even the smallest needs

There are a lot of talented people in the world aren’t there.

I was reminded of this when I ran across the [latest False Knees
comic](https://falseknees.com/403.html), which is gorgeous. (_False Knees_ is
a regular watercolored comic strip about birds voicing observations,
alternately profound and profane.) And I thought: it’s so great that they have
628k followers on Instagram, 139k on Twitter, 270k on Facebook, and also an
online store.

This is new! The transition: When I was at school, all the kids played
football or mooched around the grounds outside during break. We weren’t
allowed indoors. I visited 10 years later, and some of the music offices had
been turned into recording studios; during breaks, kids were inside making
music, making art, and yes outside playing sport too, but what I mean is that
they were enjoying their talents.

But I feel like we’ve barely scratched the surface. _False Knees_ is
exceptional and it’s wonderful that they have a million fans, but generally
speaking:

I think about all the great artists who aren’t necessarily _also_ great
hustlers.

I think about those two kids in Kenya who [invented a prosthetic robot arm,
controlled by brain signals](https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p095c1yx). Of
the almost-8-billion people alive, how many other great inventors are there
who don’t get the opportunity to walk the path to their inventions?

We have unlocked like 1% of opportunity and realisation of talent in the
world.

I don’t mean in a purely commercial way but primarily artistic and
imaginative. So not really about jobs; more generally about being fulfilled.

But let’s think about jobs for a minute…

"Makes you wonder what the global economic cost is, of LinkedIn being so
terrible," [said Kevin
Cannon](https://twitter.com/multikev/status/1393502156972609536?s=20) (when I
talked about this on Twitter) and that’s a provocative framing. If you were to
take the LinkedIn mission in its broadest sense as

…then what would you do?

One model is the traditional labour exchange – in the UK [government-run
labour exchanges were established in
1909](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Labour_Exchanges_Act_1909), and honestly
my only insight into how they worked (compared to today’s job centres) comes
from listening to a ton of old episodes of _Hancock’s Half Hour_ from the late
1950s, which is the show that invented the sitcom, and our lad Tony Hancock
often ends up in one.

They seem maybe more _hands-on,_ compared to today’s model? That’s
interesting.

So maybe let’s look at the London Olympics (2012) “talent identification”
program: a nationwide scheme where you, a fit person in your early 20s who
plays hockey on weekends, turn up, have experts measure your arms and legs and
strength ratios and twitch muscles, etc, and say, “hey, have you thought about
Niche Sport X, we could hothouse you in that and not many other countries
participate, so you might win and our ROI is good”. Which is how Team GB ended
up 3rd in the medals table.

I have a picture in my head of something like that…

You turn up with an aptitude for making smart aleck remarks and a good eye, so
the “creative industries talent identification bureau” (or whatever) gives you
a digital tablet, a mentor relationship with a handful of web artists, and
some back-office support to set you up with an online shop and a merchant
account.

I mean… why not? Why not hand crank the process, literally handhold people
into discovering and fulfilling their potential, leading to them (a) improving
culture, or (b) paying more taxes, or (c) both, and if not then at least (d)
being happy? Rethink the model. How could it be economically viable?

Another model I admire is the Open University. [Established in
1969](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_University) to provide a university
education exploiting the new technology of television, it’s now the UK’s
largest undergrad institution and reaches people that others can’t. What’s the
2021 equivalent?

At times like this I think of Bao Xishun.

In 2006, two dolphins at an aquarium in Fushun, China, swallowed some plastic
shards and were at risk of death. Veterinarians were unable to extract the
plastic.

But China has the world’s largest population.

And with the world’s largest population, it has the world’s tallest man.

And the world’s tallest man has the world’s longest arms. They called him.

And so Mongolian herdsman Bao Xishun, the tallest man, reached into the mouths
and down the throats of the dolphins with his arms, the longest arms, 1.06
metres, and [retrieved the plastic and saved their
lives](http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/asia-pacific/6178659.stm).

I can only imagine the infrastructure and institutions required to connect
that particular need to that particular talent, and what could be unlocked if
those connections could be made continuously and in all sorts of ways.
