# Let me recruit AI teammates into Figma

Okay sorry this is a post mainly about startup growth and KPIs. I apologise in
advance.

So we’re on the same page, let me recap some hunches:

SEE ALSO: [Designing user interfaces with bots not
buttons](/home/2022/05/09/npcs).

Ok so we’re got a capability and an interaction paradigm. What’s missing is
the economics.

Revenue is a lagging indicator. What I mean by economics in this context are
the metrics that precede revenue: acquisition and retention.

This is worth figuring out because otherwise this new model won’t emerge.
Companies offering the service won’t grow.

SaaS was an innovation that unlocked Web 2.0 (in b2b). Selling software as a
service meant that:

This model doesn’t hold in the _“AI teammate”_ world, so we’ll need to find
something to replace SaaS:

More problems! Given these AIs aren’t essential tools that you open again and
again, what’s the retention mechanism? How will users remember that their AI
editor teammate function can be invoked?

Here’s a guess: **social discovery is the key.**

Perhaps [app features should be ownable and
tradable](/home/2022/04/29/adaptive_ui). A pocketful of feature flags. In
short: instead of having thousands of features, mostly unused, undiscovered in
a thousand menus, you would _see a colleague_ using a feature in a multiplayer
app (like an editing feature in a doc, or co-presenter in Zoom), and then…
they could just give it to you. (Or you could buy it.)

Or to put it another way, adopting the NPC = UI metaphor: with AI teammates,
instead of having to find the “editor” function in a menu, you would be
_introduced to the editor NPC_ in a multiplayer space. (This is why [I care so
much about the multiplayer web](/home/2021/09/27/multiplayer).) You wouldn’t
purchase or subscribe, you would _recruit._

This takes care of awareness and also the de-risking part of acquisition
currently catered for by free trials (if you see somebody else’s editor NPC in
action, you’ll already be 50% convinced).

The revenue model is secondary but I think, to begin with, it’ll be a bit like
buying credits. You’ll buy X photos synthesised per month, or something like
that, and step up and down tiers. Your photo synthesiser NPC (or editor NPC,
or engineer NPC) can let you know when you need more.

(Monthly subscriptions won’t work because of the highly variable underlying
compute cost. I’ve already seen a few AI projects playing with credits, it
makes sense.)

That’s discovery and revenue. **What about retention?**

The more I think about this, the more I realise that this is a part of the “AI
synthesis” capability set which _hasn’t yet been built._

Let’s imagine we have an AI teammate. If it’s like today’s software then, for
anything powerful, you’re going have to hit a button. But teammates don’t wait
to be instructed to take on a task, they jump in.

A _human_ editor teammate will maybe make a single suggestion on a doc, and -
if you accept it - they will go ahead and do the rest of the work.

If they’re feeling underutilised, they’ll reach and actively ask you for
things to do – if a clear route isn’t evident for a task, they will request
the prompt. Or they’ll keep an eye on your shared files and projects and make
suggestions about where they could help.

_Making this work will be hard._

AI synthesis necessarily includes a view of what “good” looks like. What is a
good image; what is good code; etc. That’s possible because we have a ton of
images in the world; there’s a ton of code, and so on.

**BUT: AIs will also need to synthesise what _good team behaviour_ looks like
– and jump in.** What actions will help the group? Where is it useful to jump
in? What will further the goals of the org? How can that even be measured?

As far as I know, self-setting goals is an AI capability that doesn’t exist
yet, and it’s beyond the scope of the type of AI synthesis that has been
coming along in leaps and bounds these last few months.

Until we have it, I can see people making prototypes of AIs that are useful
for teams, but I can’t see startups growing around them.

What are the metrics that will allow for optimising all of this? Interactions
per month. Mean social group size per introduction. _Introductions per
interaction._ Unsolicited interaction rate. There will be a whole industry
around measuring, correlating, and optimising these.

Hey, here’s another question: what’s the standard NPC API that a multiplayer
app (like Figma etc) can offer, such that my new AI helper can join the team?
Appearing in the presence bar, being invitable by @ mentions of their name,
etc.

A lot to do!
