# Post at 13.35, on Wednesday 19 Jan 2011

Imagine a robot you can control from 1,000 miles away. You feel like you're
there. People near the robot treat it like it's actually you in the room --
they include you in conversations. You can speak back, see, maybe point at
things, and move around. This is a telepresence robot. There are a bunch on
the market.

[QB from Anybots](http://anybots.com/ "Company homepage.") (tagline: "Your
Personal Avatar") looks like a broom standing up on wheels. At the top of the
broom handle is a head which contains: a microphone and speaker; a webcam; a
screen (that shows a video feed of you); a laser to point at things. On the
back of the head is a web address. You visit that website to drive the robot
around, and: "The robots eyes go dark to indicate to that you are no longer
logged in."

[AVA from iRobot](http://singularityhub.com/2011/01/14/irobots-ava-has-an-
ipad-for-a-head-video/ "iRobot make those robot vacuum cleaners.") (tagline:
"Robots that Make a Difference") has three wheels and is between 3 and 5 feet
tall. It has laser and sonar sensors and is semi-autonomous: it can explore a
room on its own and build a map. An iPad plugs into the neck and can run
different applications. One app might be telepresence. iRobot's first run at
telepresence robotics was the
[ConnectR,](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6elOYa9vIxc "Launch video.")
("Virtual Visiting Robot") back in 2008. This was a robot vacuum cleaner the
shape of a dustbin lid that travelling businessmen would dial into from their
hotel rooms to spend quality time with their ignored children. [Like
this.](http://irbt.imageg.net/graphics/category_images/ConnectR_SprCat_r2a-04.jpg "Freaky.")

The [Giraffe video conferencing robot](http://headthere.com/products.html "From HeadThere.") (strap: "robots that let you be in two places at once")
looks like a mirror on a tall, sturdy, plastic, purple stand with wheels.
[Uses include](http://headthere.com/applications.html "Brilliant list.")
remote team management, teletourism and elder care. The Giraffe is not on sale
in the USA.

[Tilr from RoboDynamics](http://robodynamics.com/products/ "Industrial") (no
tagline) is a flatscreen monitor held aloft a sleek, red, industrial stand.
The wheels are concealed under an angular base with black rubber bumpers. A
video camera is slung under the monitor. The robot appears to wear a backpack.
It is made for factories. It wants to be [Iron
Man.](http://www.wired.com/dangerroom/2008/05/the-real-life-o/ "Red! Power!
Man!")

From InTouch Health ("extending your reach") comes the
[RP-7,](http://www.intouchhealth.com/products_rp-7_robots.html "Trust me, I'm
a doctor.") an oversized iron built up to human height, with a TV screen and
double video camera on top. "RP" stands for _R_ emote _P_ resence. In [the
photo,](http://www.intouchhealth.com/RP7i_Robot.jpg "Laughing doctor.") the
screen shows a video portrait of the operator - their entire head - which
makes it look rather like a laughing doctor is stuck inside the body of the
robot. Surely the screen should show just the face of the person?

There's a quote [attributed to Albert
Einstein:](http://answers.google.com/answers/threadview?id=62956 "Einstein on
wireless.") "The wireless telegraph is not difficult to understand. The
ordinary telegraph is like a very long cat. You pull the tail in New York, and
it meows in Los Angeles. The wireless is the same, only without the cat." I'm
unable to describe telepresence robots in such terms.
