# Post at 00.06, on Sunday 10 Feb 2008

[The visual cortex of developing
ferrets](http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=33848 "'Visual scenes and cortical neurons: What you see is what you get'") "has
more territory containing neurons selective for vertical or horizontal
orientations than oblique angles." We preferentially see up-downs and left-
rights.

You drop a population of finches on an island: [they
speciate](http://www.hras.org/sw/sw11-04.html "Adaptive radiation of Darwin's
finches."), populations diverging from one another as they find niches. But
each incipient species has as part of its environment _every other_ incipient
species. It's complex. The eventual set of species are not only determined by
the size of nuts, the type of trees and the local predators, but through an
iterative solution to the [force-directed
graph](http://www.cricketschirping.com/weblog/?p=545 "Each node a finch
population.") of the species, overlaid on the peaks and contours of the
[fitness landscape](http://www.uwyo.edu/benkman/rightsideresearch.html "Click
on that fitness landscape image, it's gorgeous.").

Maybe with a slightly different composition of the initial population, and
we'd have six eventual species, not eight.

Could we regard the fundamental forces of physics as species? [Could they have
speciated differently, at the end of the GUT
Era?](http://ircamera.as.arizona.edu/NatSci102/NatSci102/lectures/eraplanck.htm "History of the universe. That's a pretty awesome opening image.")

There is general agreement that human personalities may more-or-less be
plotted in a five-dimensional space, where [the five trait-
dimensions](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Five_personality_traits "It's one
of those Standard Model things. It's not capital-t True, but it works.") are:
openness; conscientiousness; extraversion; agreeableness; neuroticism.

Within that space, are there attractors of personality, semi-stable or
wandering fitness peaks? Just as our visual cortex is tuned to particular
orientations of line, is our internal 'model of the other' tuned to particular
personalities? Are there maybe only a few dozen personality archetypes which
can mutually co-exist in a connected population? [These archetypes emerge
sometimes, perhaps.](http://interconnected.org/home/2008/02/09/impro "At the
bottom: the same Mask, the same personality.")

And perhaps there are particular stories, too, that are easier to understand
and easier to remember because they align with the grain of thought; narrative
archetypes like cause-and-effect, the Fall, [the Hero's
Journey](http://www.divineparadox.com/Arts/archetypes_on_the_path.htm "A
braided structure this one.").

Maybe the root of [narrative compulsion](http://idiolect.org.uk/notes/?p=384 "'See also life imitates art.'") is that we see something occur, and the story
that pops into our head is the 'cause-and-effect' one, we mistake the ease and
fluidity of that story in our head for _truth_. We're fooled because "it slips
into place because the explanation fits reality" is indistinguishable from "it
slips into place because the explanation is easy to understand with my brain."

"Cognitive therapy works because it helps patients re-narrate their lives"
([quote source](http://www.thebreakthrough.org/breakthroughbook.shtml "Break
Through: From the Death of Environmentalism to the Politics of
Possibility.")). Cybernetics was a cognitive therapy for science. We need help
re-narrating the whole time, because the problem is this: obvious looks like
true.

[Just as tricking a woman into unknowingly blushing fools her into thinking
she's attracted to you.](http://aaronsw.jottit.com/thegame "Aaron Swartz pulls
apart The Game perfectly.")

[Just as you misread movie close-ups for your paying attention, and tension
from loud noises as suspense.](http://www.davidbordwell.net/blog/?p=300 "How
do you feel suspense if you know what's going to happen?")

Here's one that happens a lot: the misidentification of understanding for
original thinking.

And another: the relief, the release of tension at the end of a story, the
knowledge that phew it was actually _going_ somewhere, and when it all wraps
up and there's an indicator - a nod, a rhythm change, - that we're _done_...
that release of narrative tension being misidentified as _funny._

Here's what my new hero, Steve Martin, has to say about [being
funny](http://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/funny-
martin-200802.html?c=y&page= "Read this from start to finish. Steve Martin is
a genius."): "What if there were no punch lines? What if there were no
indicators? What if I created tension and never released it? What if I headed
for a climax, but all I delivered was an anticlimax? What would the audience
do with all that tension? Theoretically, it would have to come out sometime.
But if I kept denying them the formality of a punch line, the audience would
eventually pick their own place to laugh, essentially out of desperation."
