# Video calls, doing stuff together, and the TV room

This morning we lunged and squatted along to [PE with
Joe](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCAxW1XT0iEJo0TYlRfn6rYQ) as we have for
most days of the lockdown, and all together across three homes and two
continents as we have for the past week or so.

We have a family iMessage group so there’s usually a bit of text chat just
before 9 to see who’s up for it. Then somebody hits the FaceTime button (which
is hidden at the top) to kick off a video call.

Then what we do, in our house, is precariously prop the iPad against the TV
for the group video call. The workout is a YouTube Live thing at 9am every
weekday, so that shows on the TV itself. We’re here in London. There’s another
bit of the family doing the same elsewhere in the UK, and then another bit of
the family in Queensland, Australia, where’s it’s 6pm, and we all do the
workout together.

The noise is catastrophic so we tend to mute YouTube and listen the exercise
instructions via Australia instead, which is out of sync and _absurd_ when you
think about it, but it works.

There’s a little bit of chat in rest periods, mainly with our toddler who gets
thoroughly underfoot – I managed to sit on her and later take her out entirely
with a backwards kick today. Then afterwards we wave bye or sometimes hang
out.

I think this is magical.

A couple of ways this could be better:

I was chatting with designer + friend **Joe Malia** about this a couple days
ago and he said "I want something to keep in touch with folks more but don’t
always have something new to say (and that’s not a bad thing)" – and I said,
what a design brief that would be: how to keep in touch without anything new
to say.

Perhaps there are a couple of clues in the daily workouts?

Video calls are becoming accepted as a place we can _do_ stuff together rather
than just have mere conversations. And you don’t need anything new to say if
you’re doing a workout, or playing bridge, or singing in a choir together
_(all of which my mum is doing pretty regularly btw)._

So one question is how video call software needs to change if it’s going to be
used for domestic activities, instead of sharing PowerPoint slides.

Then thinking about **togetherness** which has a kind of “social attention”
ladder. From the top…

_(Some systems have a more developed “presence” system: green or red activity
lights will show whether someone is online or not, that kind of thing.)_

As a group, in whole or in part, we move up and down this ladder: there’s a
push/pull from individual members that makes this happen. And it’s fascinating
to look really closely at the exact push/pull mechanisms.

**I wonder about the role of location as part of the push/pull on the
ladder.** There’s no way that I would let any of my family peep through my
phone or my tablet to automatically turn a chat into a call…

_but the TV in the front room?_

You know, MAYBE?? The front room is already a kind of semi-permeable space…

[The full text of The Naked Sun
(1956)](https://archive.org/stream/in.ernet.dli.2015.526855/2015.526855.The-
Naked_djvu.txt) by Isaac Asimov, in which Elijah Baley visits Solaria, a
planet of where everyone lives on vast estates managed by robots, and they
never, ever meet in person.

When they want to talk, they step into a _Viewing Room._

Daneel said, ‘It is necessary first to signal the individual one desires to
view. A robot will, of course, receive the message. If the individual being
signalled is available and wishes to receive the view, full contact is
established.’

Baley’s glance fell to the floor. Where did his room end and the other begin?
It was easy to tell. There was a line where the quality of the light changed
and that must be it.

And there’s a discussion about the difference between _seeing_ and _viewing:_

‘Same thing, isn’t it?’ said Baley.

‘Not at all the same thing. You’re viewing me right now. You can’t touch me,
can you, or smell me, or anything like that. You could if you were seeing me.
Right now, I’m two hundred miles away from you at least. So how can it be the
same thing?’

Baley grew interested. ‘But I see you with my eyes.’

‘No, you don’t see me. You see my image. You’re viewing me.’

Anyway.

My point is that I don’t think I’d mind somebody from my family group chat
peeping into my front room. Perhaps with a behaviour like this:

Because TV is a lean-back experience (that old phrase…) it should be possible
to hang up the call by raising my hand in the air (to let the computer that
I’m addressing it, none of this _Hey Siri_ nonsense) then saying “hang up.”

That would let me go about my day, multitask, make a cup of tea, play with the
little one, and do it all simultaneously to being on the video call. My phone
should act as a portable mic when I step out of the room.

I’m not sure I’d want this kind of behaviour in any other room except the
front room with the TV, but that shared space is so different from my phone,
or the other rooms in the house, maybe we should design for it specifically?

Too much writing! Enough.

Oh no actually, one more thing!

That talk of Viewing Rooms reminds me of the Cisco video conferencing setup
where they [paint the room the same neutral grey at both
ends](https://www.ciscopress.com/articles/article.asp?p=1351075&seqNum=2), and
the table looks like it continues through the screen, etc. Fancy.

Years back we were doing a bunch of work with Intel, and the team we were
working with was in Portland, and it was morning there, and we had to travel
to Swindon to do the calls in the evening, a bit of a way outside London,
because they had the full Cisco kit set up there.

So it’s evening and it’s also a chilly day, so we’re all bundled up. But the
meeting goes on like _three hours_ and those big screens run HOT, so
progressively the room is getting hotter and hotter. And by the end we’ve all
pulled off our sweaters and rolled up our sleeves and unbuttoned our shirts,
designers presenting the latest project deck from our meeting room sauna, all
the while doing the world’s slowest, sweatiest striptease.

Definitely too much now. Enough enough.
