# Post at 16.03, on Monday 26 May 2008

[The Geometry of
Music](http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1582330-1,00.html "Dmitri Tymoczko. Hilariously it requires as many dimensions as the chord has
component notes."): "the cosmos of chords consists of weird, multidimensional
spaces, known as orbifolds, that turn back on themselves with a twist."

Dmitri Tymoczko has created several [movies of
orbifolds](http://music.princeton.edu/~dmitri/ "Tymoczko's homepage."). It's
impossible, watching [Chopin visualised on a Mobius
strip](http://music.princeton.edu/~dmitri/chopin2.mov "Ballroom dancing."),
not to anthropomorphise the chord components, ballroom dancing around one
another, the tension in the music building and held as the partners move
apart, and harmonious closure achieved when they move together.

Then, watching [Chopin in 4-dimensional
space](http://music.princeton.edu/~dmitri/chopin3.mov "Another movie. A 3d
Mobius prism that wraps back on itself."), I get confused with [melody making
in Super Mario Galaxy](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s9ebI7JXPEk "Music has
its own urges."), where the level-select screen responds to the cursor with
changes in the ambient music, and so you can use it as an instrument.

Cause and effect are confused. Which comes first, the visualisation or the
music? If Tymoczko watched a partner and I dancing, could he interpret the
plan view of the ballroom as an orbifold, run his algorithms backwards, and
play generated Chopin that was magically in sync with our improvisation?

[Michel Gondry's video for Around the World (Daft
Punk)](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nPBmXEO3yUU) is the greatest ever made.
The dancers move into and out of the video as the parts of the music they
represent. The circular stage allows loops in the music to show up in the
choreography.

[Gondry's commentary](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4RYzYPaPpYs "It would
appear I'm obsessed with videos and music at the moment."); [the making of
Around the World](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ul3lINF31Hc "The costume
design is particularly good.").

And just as, finally, the blurring of music and representation [Gondry further
explored with Star Guitar](/home/2008/01/03/with_reference_to "With links to
my previous mentions of Star Guitar and a making of video.") seem to be
[making their way into generated music
visualisations](http://www.vimeo.com/670858 "Thanks Tom Carden for the
link."), in five years time we'll see 3d avatars auto-generating
visualisations as complex as the 1997 Around the World video.

And five years after that, our dancing in clubs will alter the music which
will alter our dancing, and the music and the visualisation/dancing will be
translations of one another, and no way to tell which is first, because none
is.

[The Super Mario Galaxy orchestra recording Gusty Garden level
soundtrack.](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qKlJmUg5uZU "Beautiful.")

So let's let go of cause and effect as an explanatory framework. It never
existed anyway, it was just easy. Let's demonise people who believe in it.

Causist people think things happen for a reason. If you make a causist, _dirty
causist,_ encounter some phenomenon, they'll point at some proceeding event or
circumstance as if **a.** that caused the thing, or **b.** that explains it.

Explaining can't be done by looking at the past. The past is dead, filthy
causist. If you try, the past retroactively becomes a series of events that
were occurring towards a goal which, at the time, they are not. Explanations
are to exist solely and entirely in the present, or not at all.

Well then, explanations are now no longer causes but networks of mutual
contingencies. We can look at explanations not as predictions, but as chords
that have reached closure. Seeing an explanation, we can feel relief that the
world is at one.

To explain a thing is to tell the story of a lattice of things and events. To
narrate a crystal.

Sometimes. Explanations dance around one another. Closure is never reached
entirely, and that's why phenomena unfold like music. So mostly explanations
are not complete, in which case almost every event - every note - is an
exception.

Causists, dirty causists, _filthy_ causists, are unable to see that the world
is almost entirely exceptional.
