# The law, the 4 day working week, and how come society doesn’t see the benefit of automation

It strikes me that automation means that the kind of laws we have can really
change.

**First there are laws as deterrence.**

If the state wants to reduce some action but it’s really hard to detect, there
are a couple of possibilities – take for example, deterring people from
driving dangerously fast. The state can make the penalty disproportionately
large: so there might be only a 1 in 1,000 chance of being caught, but if you
_do_ get caught you might get banned from driving. OR: the threshold for
penalty might be stricter, such as having the speed limit by 70 mph when the
actual “safe” speed is 75-80 mph. (Or rather, we’re not actually trying to
measure speed but danger, and speed is just a poor proxy for that.)

Multiple together the various numbers to get a deterrence factor.

Now imagine, in this era of mass surveillance and computer vision, that it’s
easier to detect and prosecute. That means that the number of prosecutions can
go up, but _for the same deterrence factor_ the laws can be more lax and the
penalty lighter.

**Second: laws that make laws possible.**

There’s an idea in cybernetics, from Ross Ashby in 1956. [Ashby’s Law of
Requisite Variety](https://www.edge.org/response-detail/27150):

if a system is to be able to deal successfully with the diversity of
challenges that its environment produces, then it needs to have a repertoire
of responses which is (at least) as nuanced as the problems thrown up by the
environment.

The complexity of the controlling system (laws, police, courts) must be at
least as complex as the system being controlled (the public). Given we want
the controlling system to be small, an easy way to achieve this is to somehow
constrain the range of behaviours of the system being controlled – to simplify
it.

That is, there are some laws that aim to make society simpler to govern, _not_
to deter behaviour which causes self-harm. Perhaps those laws could be
removed?

Using automation and mass surveillance, the control system becomes more fine-
grained; more complex. This means the allowed complexity of society should
also be allowed to increase – that is, become _less_ regulated.

**The police state and the dividend of automation**

But when we think about mass surveillance and face recognition in cameras,
etc, we don’t think about greater precision in enforcement and more freedom.
We think about a police state. There are other factors at play:

So there’s a dividend of automation that _could_ mean greater freedom, but
other forces mean it might not go that way.

**The 4 day working week**

I’m reminded of the 4 day working week, which was in the 2019 Labour Party
manifesto.

There is a trend towards greater productivity by replacing human workers with
automation. We are used to thinking about this in terms of unemployment and
re-training.

But the Labour manifesto framed this dividend of automation differently.
Unemployment would be a result of the dividend going into the pocket of
company owners. If _instead_ it went to society, we could think about a better
welfare state, more leisure time, wealth to spend during that leisure time,
vocational second careers, and so on. The “4 day working week” is a way to
imagine all of that.

**How to direct the dividend of automation?**

The problem is that we have been trained to hear “unemployment” as a problem
that the state has to deal with, not an indication that efficiency has
increased, and there is now surplus time and wealth. UNEMPLOYMENT MEANS WE CAN
DO THE SAME WITH LESS EFFORT.

How come the dividend of automation doesn’t lead to greater leisure and
greater freedom? How come we’re not even asking the questions about how this
can happen?

I think it’s because there isn’t being painted a clear enough picture of a
better future, and engaging _everyone_ in a discussion about how to get there.
Give me novels and movies of sci-fi almost-utopias. Make me ask, _how do I
live there._ Make me ask and demand, _how do we get there._
