# Some thoughts on the Glass Bead Game

When I first read [The Glass Bead
Game](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Glass_Bead_Game) (Hermann Hesse,
1943), I was awed by the beauty of this (fictional) game that is aesthetically
beautiful, simply for its own sake, yet bridges art and science producing new
insights.

All reminiscent of cybernetics which - as an interdisciplinary language -
bridged fields from anthropology to information theory, and produced insights
in cognitive neuroscience, computation, and more. (Some will disagree, which
is kind of my point.)

Yet. I spend a lot of time in the tech world, and I frequently run into
technologies that

This is technology from companies that are long-running and therefore
successful (by one definition), or startups that are well funded (and
popularity is another kind of success).

So what qualities causes my scammy spidey-sense to fire (or misfire)? It turns
out it is mostly language. It is when

The problem is that many complex disciplines look scammy like this. _Without
already being an expert,_ how is it possible to tell the difference between
necessary complexity and gatekeeping complexity? I don’t know. I think about
this a lot.

Back to tech:

I sit inside the technology ecosystem, and my own perspective is most likely
bounded by a bubble - the surface of which is where it refers more inward than
outward - and from the exterior probably it _too_ looks like a priesthood that
plays with concepts and charges for access. Perhaps? Yet clearly I feel it
brings value. Besides its economic impact, it provides me with my tools for
thinking and creativity. So how am I to reconcile that with these imagined
exterior views?

And my goodness, _design._ There’s a whole world of mysterious, self-
referential language and play with ideas that many have trouble believing
actually carries meaning to those participating, but in which I have great
faith and find much value and enjoyment.

Because, with my 2020 perspective, the Glass Bead Game alarms me. The Game is
played by a monastic caste of adepts and it takes a lifetime to master. It is
supported by the fictional society it sits within.

It’s exclusive. It’s privileged. Although it makes a show of being
meritocratic - in theory, recruits can come from anywhere - in practice it
perpetuates the class system. Cynically: the meritocracy is a sham to build
allegiances with the powerful in society at large, to enrol them in defending
its practice of extracting energy from the ecosystem, simply to perpetuate its
own complexity.

Thinking about the Glass Bead Game again, it seems more like a warning against
societal preoccupations that fiercely gate-keep themselves. Which troubles me,
because that also describes a lot of what I enjoy…

So perhaps the book is a doorway into meditating on (and perhaps learning how
to distinguish) which unproductive, self-indulgent, expertise-demanding, self-
perpetuating, expensive, worlds are actually very much the stuff of life - in
that life would have no meaning or joy without them - fiction! art! hiking!
opera! sharing great food with friends! – and which pursuits are instead
complex emergent parasites on society, with double mouths gulping from the
noosphere and the econosphere, getting fat on their own shit.
