# Post at 09.59, on Saturday 30 Jun 2007

This isn't a story I tell too many people.

A couple years back, I was hanging out with a A. in the flat we shared,
playing Tiger Woods PGA Tour and having a beer or something. S. popped his
head in - another flatmate - and a great deal of time later, returned from
wherever he'd been and asked us why we were _still_ listening to Dire Straits.
Whoops, caught out.

Anyway, we looked closer at the CD player and it turned out that it wasn't the
album that'd been on repeat, it was a single song. We'd been listening to the
single track Brothers in Arms, Dire Straits, solid for four hours. It's a
pretty awesome album, obv., and a pretty great track, but I'm not going to
admit that to a _soul_.

There was [a post at Overheard in New
York](http://www.overheardinnewyork.com/archives/010737.html "'Embrace my
inner midget'") the other day:

**Short man:** So, my therapist told me to take off my clothes and look into
the mirror.  
**Tall woman:** Why?  
**Short man:** To confront my inner midget.

I'm shy of services like [last.fm](http://www.last.fm/ "'the social music
revolution'") because I have a certain public image and letting people know I
listen to Dire Straits isn't exactly in keeping with that. Ambient drone and
Balearic house on the other hand, I'm happy for people to hear about.

But how absurd! This is who I am! I got over identity issues and pretending to
be someone I'm not in my early teens, like pretty much everyone. Hiding my
musical preferences is like wearing a mask, right. I should just let it all
hang out. Well, kinda.

Presentation of self is a complex dance. My personality is far too curious
and, uh, on occasion abrupt, but I mute that in public (well, I try). I wear a
particular expression when I know I'm being [photographed for
Flickr](http://flickr.com/photos/tags/mattwebb "Seriously, all the photos of
me look the same."). I wear t-shirts to the office and suits to conferences.
That's half the story.

The other half the story is what _you_ do. You will never publicly call me out
on not being my real self. You will never datamine my music listening habits
and publish the stupidest songs I listen to, whenever I say I like some fancy
orchestral stuff. I mean, you _could_... but you would look stupider than me
for being petty and breaking that social understanding that we all manage our
presentation of self, all the time.

This is why I don't believe these are privacy's end of days.

Along with new visibilities comes social understanding of those new
visibilities. We agree to look the other way, just as Finns hold a hand in-
front of their face while they have a phone call in a public place, and you
can slip on your swimsuit on the beach and no-one looks. Just as you will see
my predilection for Dire Straits, Genesis and Talking Heads (it turns out,
every band mentioned in American Psycho. Why is that?), laugh at me, and then
move on: I'll be proud of what I listen to, but I'll simultaneously not
mention it next time I'm visiting old colleagues in BBC Audio & Music, and you
won't call me on it because that's how the world turns.

A caveat: We can cope with the shifting boundaries of privacy and social
understanding _if_ the social accommodations are given time to emerge. It's
all to easy to read this shift and encode the lack of privacy technologically:
You can't hold a social contract with a database which is tracking your office
movements via your RFID identity card and holding the data for 6 months. You
don't have any human understanding with the algorithms harvesting your web
browsing behaviour and identifying your product affinities.

If the end of privacy comes about, it's because we misunderstand the current
changes as the end of privacy, and make the mistake of encoding this
misunderstanding into technology. It's not the end of privacy because of these
new visibilities, but it may be the end of privacy because it _looks_ like the
end of privacy because of these new
visibilities[\*](/home/more/barley/?a=the+end+of+privacy&b=all+newly+visible "Not quite Barley, but almost."). Uh, if you see what I mean.

Long story short, I decided to expose my music listening [on
last.fm](http://www.last.fm/user/genmon/ "My profile page. Actually I'm not
too ashamed of my top 10.") to the world. I looked in the mirror, embraced my
inner midget and said, hey, I listen to Dire Straits. And you know what? No-
one cares. And it's great.

The Bad album, Michael Jackson, too. Ssh.
