# Weaving women’s work, Hollerith tabulators, and procedurally generated art

There’s an exhibition at _Tate Modern_ in London that you really should see if
you get a chance: [Magdalena Abakanowicz: Every Tangle of Thread and
Rope](https://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/magdalena-abakanowicz).
It’s on till May 2023. There’s a review and bio over at _The Guardian:_

Every Tangle of Thread and Rope traces Magdalena Abakanowicz’s development as
a textile artist from the mid 1950s until the late century, beginning with
designs for tapestries and jacquard punched cards for weaving, rows of leaf-
shapes, colourways and tryouts for decorative fabrics, but soon expands, as
did her art, into sculpture and installation art.

It’s all challenging, emotionally powerful stuff. The forest of giant fabric
sculptures, immediately followed by a room of something like organs, seemed
like an assault on walls. So much about interiors, but these slightly open
sculptures so much like hung garments or rotted ancient trees, and the forest
that you can be _within_ without being contained… here’s an alternate way of
being, being enacted right here.

Though it’s the tapestries that stick in my mind - patchworks of woven fabrics

- and in particular, in the same room, an early piece made from jacquard punch
  cards.

Weaving, of course, being traditional _“women’s work”_ and programmable
jacquard looms being an industrialisation of weaving.

And Abakanowicz growing up in Poland in the Second World War… the connection I
mean is not _exactly_ [the use of IBM’s technology by the Nazis for the
Holocaust](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBM_and_the_Holocaust) but… the
Holocaust was enabled by population census data. Data was tabulated on
Hollerith machines, which was the original purpose of these very first data
processing machines when they had been invented in 1890 for the US Census (and
which eventually became computers). Hollerith tabulators were popular;
Hollerith had merged and become IBM; Hollerith punch cards (inspired by
jacquard punch cards) became IBM punch cards.

So - and this is a guess, or a query I suppose - there may have been a
connection for Abakanowicz between fascism and population control on the one
side, and weaving and industrialisation on the other, mediated consciously or
unconsciously by punch cards. The two are entangled, textiles and
totalitarianism.

Another faint trail through these themes:

At home we have a treasured piece by the artist [Hilary
Ellis](http://www.hilaryellis.co.uk). Look at [her
portfolio](http://www.hilaryellis.co.uk/portfolio.html) (and [WIP on
Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/drawntothread/)) and imagine these works
at scale: large textured canvases with repeated marks or stitches of thread.

There’s an explicit connection with women’s work:

… an enduring and persistent nature that dwells quietly within the realm of
traditional womens’ work and its often futile repetitions. …

Using a variety of media, I produce repeated marks and actions that aim at
exact replication, but whose inevitable deviations expose the frailty of the
human hand in attempting the pursuit of mechanical process. …

I mention Ellis because when I encountered her work, I thought I saw a
connection to the work of Vera Molnar.

I first found Molnar’s pioneering computer-generated art in the 1976 book
[Artist and Computer](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Title-Artist-Computer-Ruth-
Leavitt/dp/0517527359) _(Amazon)_ in which editor Ruth Leavitt collects work
and statements from a large number of contemporary artists. Wonderfully [the
entire book is online](https://www.atariarchives.org/artist/).

[Vera Molnar explains her
work](https://www.atariarchives.org/artist/sec11.php) (there are also examples
there):

Using a computer with terminals like a plotter or/and a CRT screen, I have
been able to minimize the effort required for this stepwise method of
generating pictures. The samples of my work I give here in illustration were
made interactively on a CRT screen with a program I call RESEAUTO. This
program permits the production of drawings starting from an initial square
array of like sets of concentric squares. …

And there’s a resemblance with Ellis think? Not a similarity, that’s not what
I mean, but something generative about putting the works in dialogue in my
head.

Then [this interview with Vera Molnar](https://www.holo.mg/dossiers/vera-
molnar-weaving-variations/), _Weaving Variations:_

“My work is like a textile,” Vera Molnar has told me

Molnar, like Abakanowicz, is an artist from Cold War Europe.

I don’t mean to draw connections where there aren’t any. _(Though maybe that’s
allowed!)_

Nor do I don’t mean to (say) glamourise the hand in the weave and the ritual
of repetition, opposing it to the horror of Hollerith punch cards in the
formative infancy of computers; all three of these artists connect this
territory in different ways. _(Though holy shit we should talk about the
military history of computing more.)_

But it seems to me that there is some kind of nexus of weaving, mechanisation,
women’s work - both the way it is performed and the way it is treated -
computers and what computers do to us (or what we use computers to do to each
other), power more generally…

Something something, I don’t know, I lack the tools to process these thoughts…
and this is all so delicate and so faint and I know so little about any of it…
but…

The Abakanowicz exhibition has stirred up so much in me. Do go check it out.
Art!
