# Here’s my PR tip for people (like me) who are terrible at PR a.k.a. the Tick-Tock List

The problem is that you launch a thing or have some big news and those pesky
journos won’t cover it.

Here’s one approach:

If you’re a pro, or if you have a marketing team, talking to journalists like
this is second nature. But for founders who are just getting going - and for
rank amateurs like me - it can be hard to know where to start.

So one way is to use what I call a _Tick-Tock List._

(I only call it this in my head. Nobody else says this. What I mean is you
should email people on the regular, like clockwork.)

**How to run a Tick-Tock List:**

**What should be in each email:**

The email should be short and easy to read. Use bullets.

Contents:

By achievement I mean something that is outward-facing that is actually
interesting. Concrete. If nothing happened, say nothing happened – and why.

After you’ve done this a few times, and if you’ve got something genuinely
worthy of a story, you might want to say - before your three things, **in
bold** \- that you’ve got a launch/event/newsworthy thing coming up in a week
or two, and you’re hunting for coverage. Offer to chat about it.

You might find - and this is the goal - that somebody on your list, somebody
who has never replied before, happens to receive the email at the right time
and they have the right-shaped hole in their slate, and so they get in touch
to learn more and hopefully do a story.

**More tips:**

When you say what’s coming up, don’t be cagey or fake-enticing. Your email
recipients aren’t marks, they don’t owe you anything, these are humans, one
day maybe you might be friends. Be open enough for them to make a decision.
But likewise don’t put them in the difficult position of being told a detail
via email that you really want to keep secret.

**What is newsworthy?** Think: is this so interesting that if you heard it
about someone else you would want to tell your non-bubble friends; have you
said it in the right way to be easily understood, and provided the right words
for others to do the same; can it further the narrative of the journalist.

_(Aside. I feel that every publication has a worldview that it is continuously
pushing. It could be something like “technology is building the beautiful
future we imagined when we were kids” or it could be “this thing is niche
right now but one day it will be mainstream and momentum is growing.” Find and
provide an angle to allow journalists to use your story to develop and argue
this worldview with their readers.)_

**The hard bit:**

The hard bit: continue with the Tick-Tock List.

Let’s see, what else. Did I already say this isn’t a newsletter? This isn’t a
newsletter - and there are many and I subscribe to many and they are brilliant

- so you should also one of those (and a blog, and a twitter, and…). But this
  is more intimate. An actual email. Um. Be respectful. Your goals are

I’ve shared the Tick-Tock List pattern with a few companies over the years.
I’m actually a bit nervous to share it here because it’s so trivial. But I’ve
had a good experience of this personally, and reports of good effects, so I
figured I’d write it up.

Please let me know if it works for you. (And if you’re on the other side of
the fence, I’m curious about your views too.)

**Bonus link:** Mike Butcher’s article/rant [The Press Release Is Dead - Use
This Instead](http://mbites.com/2015/07/01/the-press-release-is-dead/) is
fantastic. Check out the list of questions that he needs answered, as Editor-
at-large of TechCrunch Europe, to get to grips with a possible story.
