# Tick-tock is a both chip architecture and a corporate strategy

The breakthrough with computers, as opposed to tabulators, is that they are
not hard-wired to follow a single set process. Instead they follow
instructions and the instructions are recorded as just more data.

General purpose computing is a convention in the CPU which is so ancient that
it is architecture. Every chip has at its heart a metronome, the clock. Every
tick, the chip processes a new number. The convention is the [von Neumann
architecture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Von_Neumann_architecture) which
says that these numbers are interpreted differently, first data and then
instructions, and repeat.

_(Von Neumann was the canonical 20th century scientific super-genius behind
computers, nuclear war, and[interstellar self-replicating
probes](/home/2022/09/29/interstellar).)_

All the instructions are executed according to a timing scheme based on the
ticking of a built-in clock. The “instruction” cycles and “execution” cycles
alternate: On “tick,” the machine’s control unit interprets numbers brought to
it as instructions, and prepares to execute the operations specified by the
instructions on “tock,” when the “execution” cycle begins and the control unit
interprets input as data to operate”

Tick tock.

Ok and so famously **Intel,** the greatest computer chip company of them all,
had its [tick tock corporate
strategy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tick%E2%80%93tock_model):

Under this model, every microarchitecture change (tock) was followed by a die
shrink of the process technology (tick).

Great strategy is 50% something that is effective in the market.

And 50% something that creates alignment for the tens of thousands of people
who are being asked to follow it.

Did _tick-tock_ resonate so well for Intel because it rhymed with the von
Neumann architecture at the heart of their work, the stuff they had their
collective hands dirty with every day?

I’m sure of it.

Back when digital was new, I was at the BBC. One of the struggles was to get
the organisation to think of “digital” (i.e. websites) as something ongoing.
Something iterative. The default mental model was “TX”: transmission.

As an org the beeb often seemed chaotic. Yet there is never dead air on the
radio or on TV. Everyone knew how to hustle around the moment of transmission.

So websites, at the time, would be talked about in terms of TX. Which wasn’t
helpful. It will have changed in the two decades since.

I remember hearing that GitHub, once upon a time, allowed engineers to self-
prioritise on whatever projects - which matches the grain of the underlying
git protocol and git culture itself. Google, when I’ve encountered it, has
always reminded me of a microcosm of the heady, churning web ecosystem. For
better and worse.

At scale strategy is culture. Culture transmits most effectively along the
magnetic field lines of familiarity. The iron filings of individual behaviour
bend to the field but they also create the field.

So I think that corporations come to resemble their material in the same way
that dog owners come to resemble their dogs. For some companies, by luck or
design, this also aligns with success.
