# Tomtown

Almost a decade ago, there was a florescence of [ambient
awareness.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ambient_awareness) Because the web
was small, we used websites to share our activity in a way that would be
overwhelming now… but back then, provided social peripheral vision, creating a
sense of togetherness, no matter where we were.

Some of the tools I used:

My own take on this was
[Glancing](http://interconnected.org/notes/2003/09/glancing/) – eye-contact
for small groups, only online. I reached prototype, and I’ve tried to build it
again since. But never managed to get it quite right.

All the weird side-effects that happened! Having to turn your scrobbles off
when you’re playing an embarrassing track… or not: You gotta [embrace your
inner midget.](http://interconnected.org/home/2007/06/30/this_isnt_a_story_i)

It’s all [Presentation of Self in Everyday
Life](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Presentation_of_Self_in_Everyday_Life)
and face and [FoMO.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fear_of_missing_out)

Complex, lively, the hurly burly stuff of life.

There are a couple of services which have evolved.

Facebook does a bunch of these things, but not well. One big room with
terrible acoustics.

Hey Facebook’s new campus has the [largest open plan office in the
world.](http://www.wired.co.uk/news/archive/2012-08/28/gehry-facebook-campus)
NO SHIT.

Can I say something? [Email used to be
different.](http://www.buzzfeed.com/lukelewis/things-youll-only-understand-if-
you-went-to-university-in#.rq0aEXVKY3) "You’d spend hours crafting florid,
multi-paragraph epics, full of emotion, humour, and anecdote. Imagine giving
that much of a shit about an email today."

The web is busy now. No bad thing. But much too busy to have a single place to
gather my friends around photos, another around status updates, etc. I used to
have one community online, and now I’ve got a hundred. And while I can shard
them by app (business on LinkedIn, family on Facebook, my global village on
Twitter), it’s a lot of effort to maintain that. And it doesn’t make any
sense.

Until:

[Tom Coates](https://twitter.com/tomcoates) invited me to join a little
community of his in [Slack.](https://slack.com) There are a handful of people
there, some old friends, some new friends, all in this group messaging thingy.

There’s a space where articles written or edited by members automatically show
up. I like that.

I caught myself thinking: It’d be nice to have Last.FM here too, and Dopplr.
Nothing that requires much effort. Let’s also pull in Instagram. Automatic
stuff so I can see what people are doing, and people can see what I’m doing.
Just for this group. Back to those original intentions. Ambient awareness,
togetherness.

Nobody says very much. Sometimes there’s a flurry of chat.

It’s small, human-scale. Maybe it’s time to bring all these ambient awareness
tools back, shared inside Slack instances this time.

You know what, it’s cosy. I’ve been missing this. A neighbourhood.
