# My most popular posts in 2023 and other lists

Hello! This is a both my summary of 2023 and also the _“Start here”_ for new
readers. Lots of links and stats below!

According to Google Analytics, my 5 most popular posts in 2023 were (in
descending order):

Here are some more! [20 most popular in 2023.](/home/tagged/20-most-popular-
in-2023)

Blimey there’s a lot of AI in there.

This year my blog has really reflected my work, that’s why. I decided to
double-down on AI at the beginning of the year.

But still. Hopefully the angles here are angles you’re not getting so much
elsewhere.

Two things that I made outside client work!

I’m proud of both.

And here are some _“work-shaped”_ longer essays that got a decent amount of
attention:

There’s one “big idea” (small idea…) that I feel will carry me through 2024
and that’s ubigpt or [Intelligence too cheap to
meter](/home/2023/10/06/ubigpt) (6 Oct).

My personal faves often aren’t always the most popular. I’ve collected my
**favourite, most speculative** posts, on topics such as:

Also: [hip-hop ovens](/home/2023/01/10/salmon) which culminates with honestly
the single best pun I will ever produce.

Explore here: [16 speculative posts in 2023.](/home/tagged/speculative-
in-2023)

This year the posts I enjoyed the most are in my **Filtered for…** series.
Each collects a handful of links and then… draws a kind of line I guess?

The free association is a ton of fun.

In 2023 you’ll find posts such as:

Here’s the [whole Filtered for… series](/home/tagged/filtered-for) (104 posts
since 2014). Scroll down for the ones from 2023.

PREVIOUSLY!

Other ways to read:

If you’d like to subscribe (for the princely sum of zero $)…

I love my posts being shared. So if you read something you like, please do
pass it along and post on whatever discords or socials you’re on.

I like email replies. This year people have started sending me links they
think I’ll enjoy, and they’ve all been 100% correct. It is excellent that my
preferences are so straightforward for others to model.

I like talking to people even more. I started opening my calendar for Unoffice
Hours about 3 years and 300 calls ago and it’s still the highlight of my week.
[Learn more and book a time here.](/home/2020/09/24/unoffice_hours) _(I plan
to change up the times in 2024 to make it easier to speak to people in the
US.)_

Some stats for the stats fans.

My current streak: I’ve been posting weekly or more for **195 weeks.** (That’s
my longest streak since I started blogging here in February 2000. Blew through
that record over the summer.)

I’ve shifted focus with my personal practice this year – more making. I’m
finding real joy in designing and making. My spare cycles go into spitballing
ideas of things to try building in my private notes, and breaking ground on
those ideas whenever I have a minute.

But I can see that reflected here… fewer speculative posts, average post
length is up. And truthfully I would kinda like to find a way back to those
shorter, freer thoughts. I get a lot of energy from them.

Anyway.

I love writing here. And thank YOU. I appreciate you being here, dear reader.

_**Update 12 Jan, 2024:** Finalised 2023 stats, above._
