# Transcribing all our conversations 24/7 will be weird and also useful maybe

Sooner or later, every single conversation I have will be recorded and
transcribed and I’ll be able to look back at it later – details from a phone
call with the bank, in the hardware store asking a question, someone mentions
a book at the pub, an idea in a workshop. Ignoring the societal consequences
for a sec lol ahem… how should the app to manage all that chatter work?

_What can you do when you record everything?_

Roberto Dam: "I record myself on audio 24x7 and use an AI to process the
information."

I bought a couple of Chinese microphones, I wear them and turn them on all day
recording everything I speak, at the end of the day the files are processed
with OpenAi’s Whisper and transformed into text files from which the
information is extracted.

_([Whisper](https://openai.com/blog/whisper/) is OpenAI’s new, open source
automatic speech recognition neural net.)_

Here’s a neat feature: he has a built-in activation keyword and stop word to
indicate when the AI should pass a phrase off for additional processing.

For example to register my weight for the day I simply say out loud

`Robert WEIGHT 60.1 end Robert`

And another, to record expenses:

Every expense I make during the day I repeat it out loud to record it.

All of these appear on a personal dashboard at the end of the day.

Another, an unnerving concept:

RELATIONSHIP THERMOMETER

According to studies on couple relationships, it is possible to predict with
an accuracy of up to 90% if the couple is going to divorce by studying the
interactions, specifically the relationship between positive and negative
interactions between the couple … The magic ratio is 5 to 1.

He hasn’t built this (yet).

Dam’s system is a huge jump… into something, I’m not sure. It’s a memory
prosthetic, partly? I wonder what I would _stop_ doing. Would I stop adding
items to the household shared shopping list because I would know that I could
just search my conversations later? So in a way it’s replacing app
interactions; not just for memory but a kind of very slow voice assistant.

All of this without even being realtime.

_(OpenAI’s Whisper isn’t perfect. But, as a Brit, I have never had good
experiences with voice recognition. Machines don’t understand my voice. I get
the feeling that, for people with a North American accent, Whisper is only an
incremental important. But let me tell you: for me, it’s night and day.)_

_How about if transcription were realtime?_

Transcription basically means that conversations because machine-readable, or
rather AI-consumable.

Here’s a tweet from the CEO of [DoNotPay](https://donotpay.com) which is an
app that gives legal advice on, e.g., how to fight speeding tickets.

Anyone with a speeding ticket hearing coming up, please DM me.

We want to build a @donotpay bot that _listens to the court hearing via your
AirPods and whispers what to say with GPT-3 and LLMs._

We just want to experiment and will pay the ticket, even if you lose!

_AirPods + AI =[a cyborg prosthesis of the centaur
type](/home/2020/05/29/musical_cyborgs)._

Anyways, that’s for the future.

All I mean to say is that always-on transcription + realtime is _enabling_ in
all kinds of ways. Exploration required.

_An app:_

So let’s scope this back. Let’s imagine we record all conversations but maybe
only in a work context and only in meetings.

Is there an app, 50% email client and 50% note-taking _“tool for thought”_
that stores all of these conversations, letting me process them when I need
to, and automagically surfacing tasks and relevant information?

You need all of this because otherwise it’s just like the meeting transcripts
you get out the back of Zoom and nobody, like _nobody_ looks at those.

Taken as given: reliable speaker ID, timestamps and geography.

Future: so how about using the transcripts as training data to make AI
colleagues. Instead of searching for what my teammate X has said, why not make
a bot that knows everything that X knows, and then have a conversation with
them? _“Hey X what was it I said I was going to email you today?”_ – that kind
of thing.

_Realtime instrumented conversation will be disruptively weird and maybe also
positive._

Here’s **us+** _(2013)_ by artist Lauren McCarthy with Kyle McDonald, a plugin
for Google video chats that encourages equal voices in meetings.

us+ is a Google Hangout video chat app that uses audio, facial expression, and
linguistic analysis to optimize conversations based on the Linguistic Inquiry
Word Count (LIWC) database, and the concept of Linguistic Style Matching
(LSM). The app displays a visualization, provides pop up notifications to each
participant, and takes actions (like auto-muting) when the conversation gets
out of balance.

_(Thanks[Daniel Goddemeyer](http://danielgoddemeyer.com) for the pointer.)_

It’s a great provocation, right? It’s pretty punchy.

And this is what a good chair already does, isn’t it. Makes sure all voices
are heard, coaches people into good team behaviour.

So why not build that into the software? It means that meetings can be smaller
(tighter, more effective) because the “chairing” capability doesn’t need to be
in the room. Some teams are naturally good at this, some need help.

It’s definitely the feedback loop that matters here.

Anyway. Good to see some experiments before this all kicks off for real.
