# Headphones need smart transparency mode with voice recognition

Headphones should have smart transparency mode, letting in only specified
sounds and catching all other noise at an audio firewall.

I have a vague memory that I first ran across this concept in ear defenders
for hunters. These were “transparent” in that the hunter needs to hear the
distant sound of a stag stepping through the undergrowth – and then active
noise cancelling would kick in instantly for a rifle shot.

And that’s clever. I would like the same functionality but in reverse.

I’ve got my headphones on right now because I need to focus. But I’m concerned
I might miss the postman if he bangs at the door.

If I had fancy modern headphones, the answer would be to turn on transparency
mode, so that my music is layered with the ambient noise of my environment.
But that’s exactly what I _don’t_ want! I don’t want to hear people talking
downstairs, or a truck idling outside my window.

What I want is active noise cancelling, with smart transparency mode that
kicks in automatically if

_(The final one like getting an @mention notification but in real life.)_

I want to hear those things, and nothing else.

I note that Apple recently and quietly launched, as an accessibility feature
on iPhone, [Sound Recognition](https://support.apple.com/en-
gb/guide/iphone/iphf2dc33312/ios): "Your iPhone can continuously listen for
certain sounds - such as a crying baby, doorbell, or siren - and notify you
when it recognizes these sounds."

So my guess is that this is on the roadmap, and AirPods will end up being
quite the app platform.

(Or rather, given they have spatial audio, and AirPods share a high-precision
ultra-wideband, spatial positioning chip with the watch and also phones, quite
the component in Apple’s inevitable not-too-distant-future wearable augmented
reality app platform.)

Okay back to work.

P.S. I have just been reminded that, [back in February
2019](https://twitter.com/genmon/status/1098910520151863297), on the bus a
small child thought my Apple AirPods were a new kind of cigarette and that I
was smoking with my ears.

**Update:** On Twitter, [Hans Gerwitz
suggests](https://twitter.com/gerwitz/status/1347560687434870784) "I want to
allow my partner’s voice to punch through. Should be pretty “easy” if we’re
both wearing them, eh?"

Which is smart! And weirdly ageographic. It would work the same if you were in
the same room or 1,000 miles apart.

That’s the second time ageography has come up recently. Perhaps it’s a thing.
