# Trillies is better word than FAANG

I recently ran across the term _"the trillies"_ to refer to trillion dollar
market cap companies, which are currently: Apple, Microsoft, Amazon, Alphabet
(Google). (Bubbling under: Facebook, Tencent, Tesla.)

Which I like because it doesn’t take them too seriously. Like, they have so
much power in the world, it’s nice to have a name which deflates their bubble
just a tiny bit.

Compare: _FAANG._ That’s the usual term that people reach for. It’s an acronym
for Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Netflix, Google, and if I were one of those
companies then I would love to be called FAANG. It sounds like they went on a
stadium tour in the 80s. I can probably get a FAANG t-shirt at Urban
Outfitters.

So I’ve only ever seen _trillies_ used once, in one thread online, and the
person who said it claimed they made it up themselves, but I hereby give
notice that it is my go-to term from here on out. Please adopt it too and
let’s see if we can get it into the Oxford English Dictionary.

LIKEWISE:

I would also like to offer "billies" for billionaires, as in the tier of very
rich men in the world (90% of them are men) who do slightly ridiculous things
like competing to be the first billionaire in space, or attempting to reverse
ageing by consuming literally the blood of the young.

I used to (in my head) call them the International Legion of Billionaires in
honour of the fact that, as a society, we seem to rely on them to fund global
health programs, or to direct the surplus of production into the space
programme or renewable energy – all great things I’m sure, but I’d prefer to
be making those allocation decisions democratically.

But given that we are treating our billionaires as characters in some kind
Oligarchy Cinematic Universe - we need a 21st century Jane Austen to document
their lives - and the mean time between absurd events is steadily decreasing,
I am now mentally calling them _“silly billies”_ instead.
