# A series of tubes

You wait for ages for the return of internet-inspired tube-based physical
goods transport systems then two come along at once.

[PipeDreams Labs](https://i.pipedreamlabs.co) just raised seed funding to
build networks of underground PVC pipes in cities, to be used by self-routing,
self-driving robot _pods_ that carry cargo.

[There’s more in their Twitter
thread.](https://twitter.com/thegarrettscott/status/1516499134576046087) The
[14 second concept
video](https://twitter.com/thegarrettscott/status/1516499263194374147?s=21&t=LQAqjuj249ztaHlTKAKCeQ)
is neat – it’s a cupboard in your kitchen that pings like your inbox when your
groceries arrive.

This is relatively established tech (pipes and pods). What’s new is the self-
driving and the user interface.

The pods can carry anything up to 10 inches in diameter, which is ([according
the
FAQ](https://pipedreamlabs.notion.site/FAQ-e38a367834cc41258b386f0a0a8008fb))
enough for 95% of groceries and almost all preparing food deliveries – except
pizza.

So… New pizza form factor incoming? Feels relatively straightforward to
reformat food shapes.

I wrote last year about [a national packet-switched drone delivery
network](/home/2021/06/07/last_mile), riffing on the _Paris pneumatique poste_
which opened in 1866 and had automatic routing of physical items in the 1930s.

At the time, the key part for me was "an interoperable protocol for packet-
switched drone delivery in theory over the entire country" – essentially:
TCP/IP for _stuff._

And that’s what grabs me about PipeDream Labs too. Can the system be just an
alternative “transport layer” for an open protocol that _any_ company can plug
self-driving matter-packets into, regardless of whether they use pipes or
drones or motorbikes?

Definitely a role for government, if they had an ounce of imagination in their
industry policy/national infrastructure plans.

ANOTHER!

[Laundry Jet](https://laundryjet.com) is a system of pneumatic tubes,
installed in your home, to carry dirty clothes from bedrooms to the laundry
room.

It’s not new but a video went viral a few days ago.

[I like
this](https://www.reddit.com/r/Damnthatsinteresting/comments/v977wl/the_laundry_jet_is_the_first_vacuum_powered/)
_(reddit):_ you throw your laundry towards the wall outlet, and a proximity
sensor opens the door and the vacuum snatches the item out of the air.

That’s the kind of interface I expect when it comes to domestic robots (which
this is, on a spectrum with Roomba and dishwashers). Automation is no good if
it doesn’t also relieve you of the bureaucracy surrounding the task – imagine
if Laundry Jet required you to carefully fold your clothes and place them on a
platter. It’s the air grab that makes it.

Despite that: it all seems… a little over-engineered? I mean, my house is
nowhere near large enough to require a secret corridor behind the walls
exclusively for my pants. And goodness knows what you do in the event of a
blockage. If there some crazy acidic fabric-specific liquid drainclear that
you pour down the pipes to dissolve the sock bolus?

THAT SAID: my memory is vague on this, but I swear my nan had a house with a
central vacuum system? There was a little suction port by the floor in all the
rooms. That was cool. So I’m not against old-is-new-again home infrastructure.

A general purpose Laundry Jet-alike would be handy for the home.

Like: it would be handy to have a port that I put things through, and they
show up in a different room. For carrying groceries from the front door to the
kitchen, or weeding the garden and carrying it out the front.

I don’t care about speed; I just care about not carrying.

So I guess the ideal interface is that I can tap any item, wherever it is, and
announce the destination with my voice, and then at some point over the next
few hours, a robot (somehow) picks it up (somehow) and deposits it where I
said it should go. You don’t need pneumatic tubes for that.

No having to wait for the robot to arrive. It’s async. The _key_ part of the
interface is that lack of bureaucracy. That’s the lesson for me.
