# Chemicals to help you write PowerPoint and other cognitive fantasies

After mentioning in November my [discovery of the secret of the
universe](/home/2020/11/05/dentist) at the dentist, and my struggle to
retrieve it, Tully Hansen, [poet](https://overland.org.au/previous-
issues/electronic-overland/poem-tully-hansen/), dropped me a note to say that
my experience is not unique!

This story has been told variously about nitrous, ether, and chloroform, but
here’s a version from an 1870 lecture by Oliver Wendell Holmes: "I once
inhaled a pretty full dose of ether, with the determination to put on record,
at the earliest moment of regaining consciousness, the thought I should find
uppermost in my mind."

And so:

The veil of eternity was lifted. The one great truth which underlies all human
experience, and is the key to all the mysteries that philosophy has sought in
vain to solve, flashed upon me in a sudden revelation. Henceforth all was
clear: a few words had lifted my intelligence to the level of the knowledge of
the cherubim. As my natural condition returned, I remembered my resolution;
and, staggering to my desk, I wrote, in ill-shaped, straggling characters, the
all-embracing truth still glimmering in my consciousness. The words were these
(children may smile; the wise will ponder): **“A strong smell of turpentine
prevails throughout.”**

So: a class of inhaled anaesthetics triggers an experience of revelation,
struggle to recall, and a mundane truth – and this experience is individual
yet shared.

I think what catches me by surprise, about this trip to the dentist, is how
intensely personal and subjective it felt… yet that’s simply something that
nitrous produces, reliably.

RELATED: a reliable effect of salvia is to [witness the layers of
reality](https://erowid.org/experiences/exp.php?ID=111882); a reliable effect
of DMT is to encounter beings called by Terence Mckenna [self-transforming
machine elves](https://realitysandwich.com/machine-elves-dmt-entities/).

_Reliability._ Way back in 2007 [I was going
on](/home/2007/12/28/wrapping_up_2007#fortythree) about the book
_Phenethylamines I Have Known And Loved_ which documents the effects of 179
different compounds – and asking why we didn’t already have reliable smart
drugs.

I didn’t mean smart drugs like Omega-3s, which apparently boost cognitive
performance in a low level and generalised way as a diet supplement, but
instead highly targeted, functional, _reliable_ psychoactives: "Why don’t we
have abstraction modifier drugs now? Why are there no drugs to help me think
in hierarchies, or with models, or to make cross connections?"

I’m not sure I’d take any, but I still wonder about this.

I wish I could remember where, but I remember reading that the breakthrough
with Viagra was getting “erectile dysfunction” listed as a pathology. There’s
a book of official pathologies. Once something is in that book, drugs can be
developed (with research costs offset against tax); drugs can be marketed and
proscribed and bought with insurance, and so on.

So could you pathologise _“lack of lateral thinking,”_ or _“dysfunction in
authoring structured PowerPoint”,_ or _“inability to consult with the machine
elves”_ – and produce a little blue pharmaceutical to deal with the issue, a
blister pack full of 60 minute perspectives, epiphanies, and corporate
strategy skills?

I guess I’m looking back at my posts from this year, including this one
thinking about using [the GPT-3 AI as a creative
collaborator](/home/2020/09/04/idea_machine), and imagining a different
future, one based on molecular biochemistry not machine learning; rather than
looking to computers to provide mental prostheses and automate jobs, we
instead extend the gamut of human ability with cognitive interventions?

What would it mean to have utilitarian psychoactives? How would the world
change?

The mundane consequences:

Right next to the “Out of Office” email setting for when you’re on vacation, a
button that turns off your inbox and sets the auto reply just for a single
morning, clearing the decks for your weekly creative consultation with the
machine elves.

A vacuum cleaner with flashing light patterns specifically designed to capture
your attention when you’re on a deep clean trip, absolutely and happily and
regularly and chemically fixated on getting your chores done.

A transcranial magnetic stimulation helmet that [takes over your legs for your
30 minute commute](/home/2015/03/23/filtered) so you can avoid crowded trains,
get your 10,000 steps in, _and_ catch up on your TV shows.
