# TV that mixes fact and fiction

I’m into TV shows that play with the boundary of fact and fiction. Here are
some that stick in my head.

**Murder Island** (2021, [here’s a review](https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-
radio/2021/oct/01/murder-island-the-cracking-drama-ultimate-twist-reality-tv))
is a 6 part murder mystery (plotted by author Ian Rankin) where they’re all
actors except for members of the public LARPing as in-world detectives. Only
it’s competitive: there are multiple detective teams playing to solve the
case, and the winners get a cash prize.

So for the viewer there is narrative on two levels: the murder mystery itself,
and then the drama of watching other people solve the murder mystery.

High budget escape room meets immersive theatre meets reality TV?

**[Prehistoric Park](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prehistoric_Park)** (2006)
was a nature show told as a fly-on-the-wall documentary about an animal park
in South Africa. Aimed at kids. Usual drama of dealing with sick animals,
finding the right food etc. Except that these animals are dinosaurs, and at
the back of the park is a literal _time portal_ that the keepers drive a truck
through back to the Cretaceous or whatever.

It was wild, and told completely straight. From the Wikipedia article (linked
above) I see that the format is a “mockumentary” which makes sense – it was
the era of _The Office._ But whereas _The Office_ was a (fictional) comedy
told with the tropes of (factual) documentary - which makes sense as comedy is
often arch and plays with preconceptions - _Prehistoric Park_ is… something
else. I find it hard to parse.

Actually it reminds me in a way of _Robinson Crusoe_ (1719), thought of as the
first novel in the English language (how true that is? Don’t know). Defoe’s
novel goes to extraordinary lengths to work its way into the fiction,
describing how the manuscript was (apparently) written, how it came into the
hands of the so-called author, why they decided to publish, and so on. Novels
nowadays skip most of that – we take it for granted. (But we retain a rump
understanding of the presence of the reader in the fiction. For example the
author often ensures that narrative is only ever told through the perspective
of one character or another, avoiding omniscience.)

So _Prehistoric Park_ goes to great lengths to explain why the TV is showing
images of the deep past despite the viewer knowing that it is 2006, and the
choosen device is the in-world time portal.

Great show though.

BONUS, on this topic: _Ghostwatch_ (1992) which U.K. viewers of a certain age
will have burnt into their psyche. Horror dressed as documentary, thoroughly
credible to start and then… Read [Ghostwatch: the Halloween hoax that changed
the language of
television](https://www.newstatesman.com/uncategorized/2017/10/ghostwatch-
halloween-hoax-changed-language-television) _(The New Statesman):_ "a one-off
show, inspired by the first flickers of fake news, terrified a generation. The
BBC quickly disowned it. Now, its cast and creators tell their side of the
story."

**[Murder in
Successville](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murder_in_Successville)** is a
semi-scripted comedy/detective drama where all the actors are impersonating
celebs. For example the police chief is (fake) Gordon Ramsey. The detective is
the only person with a standalone non-celeb character, and each episode they
have an assistant.

This assistant is a legit celeb, and they have to solve the murder of the week
– only they also the only person who doesn’t know the script. There’s a lot of
absurdity and a lot of improv. As with _Murder Island_ there is dual enjoyment
for the viewer: firstly solving the mystery (there are always enough clues)
and secondly watching the celebrity collapse in bafflement.

So there are these multiple layers of reality: the so-called celebs; the
story; the impersonations; the celeb of the outer reality inserted into the
inner reality; the viewer watching it all at home.

People are way better at consuming media on multiple simultaneous levels than
I think is often appreciated. Look at wrestling which is both fake and real.
So the “fake news” scare and our slightly po-faced insistence on authenticity
(whatever that is) on social media both feel unsophisticated in comparison. I
wonder if we could have a social media platform that _embraced_ are-they-
aren’t-they pretending as something completely ok. Something to unpack there.
