# Two org charts

Apple’s org chart under Steve Jobs can be seen in Adam Lashinsky’s Fortune
article [Inside Apple](http://www.amazon.com/Inside-Apple-Steve-janitor-
ebook/dp/B004ZNFXFK) (as Kindle Single), and [in low resolution
here.](http://www.mondaynote.com/2011/08/28/steve-who's-going-to-protect-us-
from-cheap-and-mediocre-now/) Lashinsky’s [book version of Inside
Apple](http://www.wired.co.uk/news/archive/2012-02/08/inside-apple-book-
review) includes an updated org chart centred on the new CEO, Tim Cook.

I won’t pretend to understand how large companies work, but in my
understanding an org chart is a part map and part blueprint of a large variety
of connections:

What interests when I look at such charts is trying to find “the tail that
wags the dog.”

Let me explain. I am curious as to how products are invented – how is the
genuinely original incepted into an organisation, and how does this idea
because real? I look for two clues in the structure of the org chart:

The group in Apple’s case is said to be Jonathan Ive’s product design group –
a dozen or so people who invent new products. The gradient from this group
spelt out in a playbook called the ANPP. From the book _Inside Apple:_

"Once the design is under way, the rest of the company kicks into gear. The
two organizations that will be responsible for the product are the supply-
chain team and the engineering corps. _Thus begins the Apple New Product
Process, or ANPP._ The ANPP is the step-by-step playbook spelling out
everything that needs to get done to make the product. The ANPP wasn’t always
unique to Apple. Xerox, HP, and others used a similar playbook in the late
1970s and early 1980s. A former Apple engineer described Apple’s process,
which began as a manufacturing aid aid for the Macintosh, as part art, part
science. The goal of the ANPP “is to automate the science part so you can
focus on the art,” said this engineer. The process elaborately maps out the
stages a products creation will follow, who touches it, how responsibilities
will be assigned across functions, and when assignments will be completed."

(The passage that follows this gives more details from the ANPP. Two managers
take over the product: one from supply chain, and the other from engineering.
I don’t know where software comes in, but I understand - from reading around -
is that it’s when the hardware features are more-or-less finalised. What
little of the process that is public is fascinating, and I recommend the
book.)

You could, I suspect, draw the ANPP atop the org chart - perpendicular to many
of the lines of responsibility - and map out the gradient a product moves
along on its route to market.

Now I don’t completely buy Lashinsky’s description. The iPod had a very
different origin, where the market opportunity was spotted by one party, the
project left dormant until another party spotted a technological opportunity
in a new miniaturised hard drive appearing in the supply chain, the novel UI
was spotted by marketing, and the person bringing the project at least halfway
from invention to reality didn’t join the project until many of these seeds
were in place. The organisation which Apple has become _isn’t_ the
organisation that created the iPod: there is no guarantee that its current
form will be a true codification of previous success.

But still, interesting food for thought.

[Disney’s 1943 org chart](http://www.atissuejournal.com/2009/08/07/walt-
disney's-creative-organization-chart/) is also fascinating, primarily because
it maps out exactly the gradient: Walt, to story, to direction which
coordinates a network of parties - the direction of flow here is wonderfully
mapped - and finally the production flow narrows and the picture goes to
market.

It’s a lovely diagram and again, who knows how it well it describes the “at
play” network of Walk Disney Studios. In particular the roles of marketing and
technology are not well described – but maybe this was unnecessary: perhaps
innovation in the technology of animation was done in a sideways fashion, by
running particular innovation pictures (such as Fantastia) that would
introduce novel processes into these departments; and maybe product-market fit
was part of Walt’s genius and so it didn’t need to be introduced elsewhere in
the machine.

But to see the gradient by which an idea can be “plussed” and not corrupted as
it moves towards market, well that’s fascinating.
