# Post at 11.08, on Friday 13 Jul 2007

Two years ago today, Matt Jones took [this photo of me and
Jack](http://flickr.com/photos/blackbeltjones/25695351/ "Messes!"). Shortly
after, we bought Z.V.B. Ltd. off the shelf and renamed it Schulze & Webb Ltd.
I had a terrible haircut, rectified only days later.

One year ago (the [portrait on our about
page](http://schulzeandwebb.com/about.html "Reflecting on ourselves.") is from
that month): Jack had finished college. I was billing through the company but
effectively acting as a sole consultant. I wrapped up my projects that July;
aside from odd jobs, we didn't issue another invoice till 1 November. Those
were some lean months.

What happened in that time is we became a company.

Our starting point was that we wanted to work together, on exciting work for
good clients. And we also knew that you get what you do. So we started turning
down any work which meant we'd operate separately or as freelancers.

That led us to marketing, and market positioning, business plans, and
quarterly targets. In my notebook from last year, there's a matrix of
short/medium/long-term with the kind of work we'd like, for what kind of
clients, and how we'll get the work. We're still following it.

I put money into the company. We introspected a lot, tried to figure out what
our model would be for balancing consultancy and our own projects. We got the
lay of the land and positioned the troops.

One week in late October 2006, we received two phone calls and two briefs: One
three month user experience project, and one design strategy intensive project
for what turned out to be a recurring client. That was our first profitable
quarter, and we've been booked out since.

But those were lean, _lean_ months. It's tough on the wallet and on your sleep
too. We were forged then.

It's been a funny two years. I feel like I'm on my third company. The first
was leaving the BBC (after writing [Mind Hacks](http://mindhacks.com/book/ "'The book'") part-time) to freelance and work with Jack. Second was starting
the limited company with Jack officially, pitching in together. Third was last
year, turning down the freelance work.

(The story of last year's jump is [in the Daily
Telegraph](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/money/main.jhtml?xml=/money/2007/05/15/cbstart15.xml "Starting out: Creatives clued in to 'Generation C'"), incidentally.)

Hey, so will there be a jump number four? We've reached stage three of last
year's business plan, and I never wrote a stage four. All the pieces are in
place now, and it's a question of whether we want to put everything back into
play. I suspect, yes, there will be a jump. And I don't want to promise any
news soon because these roads are long, but there have been some interesting
recent developments and we're feeling hungry.

I just wanted to bookmark this moment, and that photograph. Two years!
