# Two obvious financial tips

I think the LinkedIn euphemism for it is a “portfolio career,” but really what
that means is I have a bunch of stuff on the go simultaneously.

So for the past three months I’ve been working with Google, directing a small
team on an invention project. I have my vending machine bookshop; I advise a
couple of hardware startups; I’ve been doing a bit of teaching, etc, etc. I am
trying to avoid building another agency.

Working for myself: I love the independence.

Working for myself: Holy shit I hate thinking about cashflow. It destroys any
kind of creativity I have, and stops me being casual.

There’s a time for hustling, and there’s a time for being casual. I find the
most interesting opportunities emerge from coffees and talking widely. And
interesting opportunities breed interesting opportunities – as Jack says, [you
get what you
do.](http://interconnected.org/home/2007/07/13/two_years_ago_today) So, doubly
important to hold off accepting anything until the great stuff appears.

And if I haven’t got much money in the bank? That’s when I make bad decisions.
I mean, this is a question of
[BATNA:](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Best_alternative_to_a_negotiated_agreement)
If my "Best Alternative to a Negotiated Agreement" is that I can’t pay my
mortgage, then I have to take whatever gig is going, at whatever terms.

I follow two rules to keep myself sane as an independent. This goes for
freelancers, contractors, sole traders, and whatever other forms of “self-
employed” there are out there.

It occurred to me that other people might be interested, so I thought I’d
share them here.

Business money is not my money. To smooth out peaks and troughs, all gigs pay
into a separate account and I pay myself monthly.

My salary is the same amount every month, and paid on the same day of every
month.

(Business) taxes also come out of this float.

Once I take into account business expenses and my salary, I can calculate how
many months I can survive without work. That’s my runway.

If my runway is six months, I can sleep at night. If it’s six months minus one
day, that’s a psychic shitstorm right there.

The reason being that it typically takes me three months to go from [asking
around](http://interconnected.org/home/2015/12/17/next) to starting a gig
(longer for the most unusual ones). Then let’s say I get to invoice after a
month’s work, then it takes a month to get paid, then add a month as a buffer…
that’s six months right there.

When I started as an independent again, I kept my salary super low until I
built up my six months runway.

There’s a flip side: If the runway is too long, I stop being hungry. Being
hungry is good.

Two tips. Not rocket science. I imagine most people have something similar.
For me, this is what gives me room to be exploratory, and how I sleep easier
at night.
