# Intelligence too cheap to meter

The ubicomp manoeuvre was to realise that Moore’s Law cuts both ways.

[Moore’s Law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moore%27s_law): pound for pound,
computers double in power every 18 months. Or 100x over ten years. _(And let’s
forget about the death of Moore’s Law. We’ve been stuck in an[AI
overhang](/home/2020/08/24/ai_overhang) and I’m 100% sure there is a lab
someone using AI to jiggle up silicon pathways literally as I write this.)_

If computers get 100 times more powerful over a decade, we can EQUIVALENTLY
say that computers get: 100 times smaller; or 100 times cheaper; or 100 times
more abundant.

So that was the enabler behind Mark Weiner’s 1988 conception of ubiquitous
computing.

At the turn of the century, a typical workshop or factory contained a single
engine that drove dozens or hundreds of different machines through a system of
shafts and pulleys. _Cheap,_ small, efficient electric motors made it possible
first to give each machine or tool its own source of motive force, then to put
many motors into a single machine.

A glance through the shop manual of a typical automobile, for example, reveals
twenty-two motors and twenty-five more solenoids. They start the engine, clean
the windshield, lock and unlock the doors, and so on. …

Most of the computers that participate in embodied virtuality will be
invisible in fact as well as in metaphor. Already computers in light switches,
thermostats, stereos and ovens help to activate the world

Just the enabler though. The original conception, in Weiser’s [Ubiquitous
Computing
#1](https://cgi.csc.liv.ac.uk/~coopes/comp319/2016/papers/UbiquitousComputing.htm),
was inspired by looking at _people_ and attempting to bend computing towards
actual practice:

Inspired by the social scientists, philosophers, and anthropologists at PARC,
we have been trying to take a radical look at what computing and networking
ought to be like. We believe that people live through their practices and
tacit knowledge so that the most powerful things are those that are
effectively invisible in use. This is a challenge that affects all of computer
science.

Ok.

BY ANALOGY:

If future AI models will be more and more intelligent (per watt, or per penny,
or per cubit foot, whatever we choose measure) then we can equivalently say
that, in the future, _today’s_ AI models will become cheaper and more
abundant.

What happens when intelligence is too cheap to meter?

[Too cheap to meter:](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Too_cheap_to_meter) "a
commodity so inexpensive that it is cheaper and less bureaucratic to simply
provide it for a flat fee or even free."

[Me on fractional horsepower](/home/2017/10/24/filtered) and fractional AI in
2012 and 2017:

Electrification began in cities around 1915 and with electrification so too
came the potential market for washing machines, refrigerators, vacuum cleaners
and a host of other commercial appliances. … By 1920, over 500,000 fractional
horse-power motors were powering washers and other appliances in America.

In 2033, GPT-4 will be 100x faster, or 100x smaller, or 100x cheaper. What
then?

LIKE:

Given an internal camera and access to Google, your oven cooks everything
perfectly (and asks you about your preferences if it’s ambiguous).

Or telepathic light switches. Given some history and a bit of behavioural
pattern matching, a Feynmann-level light switch could guess your intentions
pretty well.

Viable home weaving of clothes? Buy infinite Uniqlo and a robot sewing
machine. It’s interesting that ubiquitous AI means the end of ease of use: you
can have a home fabrication unit or whatever that is as complex as you like,
with whatever quantity of subprocesses, and there’s no skills gate that means
you have to hire a trained professional or learn how to operate it. You will
just talk to it.

Universal lie detectors (sub-visual readings of blood flow in the face, voice
stress, etc).

In-home drones and robotics probably get solved pretty quick. So I should be
able to say to a drone: “where’s that book I own that mentions X” or “where
did I leave my keys” - but I’m not sure this is on the ubiquitous, fractional
AI end of things.

Dunno, I need to think about this. Approach it systematically.

10 years after that, 100x smaller again. Nano AI, molecular scale
intelligence. Drexler assemblers, smart dust. What if a grain of sand the size
of the dot at the end of this sentence is as smart as you are, a handful for a
penny, and can wave its flagellum to talk on the wi-fi.
