# Post at 16.22, on Wednesday 26 Jan 2011

[UFO on Tape](http://killscreenmagazine.com/articles/ufo-tape "Article about
the game.") has become - in _seconds_ \- the iPhone game I want to show
everyone. It's simple (you're trying to follow a UFO around the sky with a
video camera), it's photorealistic (it looks like UFO videos _ought_ to look),
it's X Files (the aesthetic is grainy, darting), it's sort-of augmented
reality (you have to literally move around to keep the UFO on camera, which
makes it totally physically immersive), it never breaks frame and it's simple
to understand (like Nick says, it's Steadicam
[Canabalt](http://www.canabalt.com/ "Awesome iPhone running game.")). [Play it
now!](http://gamejolt.com/freeware/games/other/ufo-on-tape/3323/ "Videos and a
buy now button here.")

All of which reminds me of [Dance
Central](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y-iKWe-U9bY "Demo") for my [XBox
Kinect.](http://www.xbox.com/en-US/kinect "XBox peripheral page.") Mostly it
takes a while for me to reach [flow
state,](<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow_(psychology)> "Psychology concept")
that mode what you're immersed and there could be a brass band in the same
room and you wouldn't notice. It sometimes happens after a couple hours
coding. It takes about 20 minutes reading, and about 5 minutes to get into it
when dancing (if the music's right). But the _UFO on Tape_ and the game _Dance
Central_ both get me into flow in seconds, like snapping your fingers and
_bam_ I'm under. Five minutes later the game ends and I'm like, hey where did
the time go. It's maybe something to do with the physical involvement that the
Kinect demands, something that I've previously called [body
thinking.](http://interconnected.org/notes/2006/07/engaging/?p=28 "Engaging
Technology presentation from 2006.") The Kinect is this freaky device that
stares into your front room with its infra red eyes, and snares your body into
an equivalent virtual representation on the screen. You can't help but tumble
into cyberspace. (It helps that my screen is a 4 foot tall projection on the
wall.)

_Swords to ploughshares_

And so I conclude with two thoughts. First, that the Kinect is magical
technology. As WW2 and ballistics gave us digital computers, and Cold War
decentralisation produced the Internet, the technologies of mass surveillance
and anti-terrorism gave us Kinect. It's [swords to
ploughshares](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swords_to_ploughshares "Wikipedia
page.") for the 21st century.
_[(src)](https://twitter.com/#!/genmon/status/3066400222478336 "What I said on
Twitter.")_

(Though let's attempt to forget [Operation
Plowshare](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Plowshare "ANOTHER Wikipedia
page.") from the 1960s, which proposed the re-use of nuclear warheads to
create canals and make road-cuts.)

_An interface can be a sandy beach, not a cliff_

Second, this mode of interacting with technology - call it tangible or
augmented reality or whatever you like - is worth watching now because it's
low key and everywhere, and only likely to become more significant.

It's talking to your XBox to play a DVD. It's [nudging your laptop to skip to
the next tune.](http://interconnected.org/home/2005/03/04/apples_powerbook "2005 bumptunes hack.") It's pinch-zooming photos on your iPhone to look
closer and rotate them. It's spinning in your chair to point a pretend camera
at a pretend UFO. It's a bit like acting. And it's a bit like playing _Let's
Pretend_ and being 6 years old. And it's restrained, non-superfluous,
sensitive and attentive. And it makes a gentler edge between the world of
computers and the world of my front room, less like a cliff between worlds and
more like a sandy beach. And it's a _lot_ of fun.

But it's not super high tech or dramatic or woo-woo-flashy like the [Minority
Report interface.](http://www.joystiq.com/2010/05/07/minority-report-ui-
designer-john-underkoffler-talks-about-the-fu/ "UI design talks about the
interface decisions.") I don't know what to _call_ it. But it's nice and
humble and human, and I like it.
