# The imminent possibility of UFOs

Heads up, there might be UFOs, and we’ll find out in June.

John O. Brennan, head of the CIA under Obama, [has this to
say](https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2020/12/john-o-brennan-
on-ufos.html): "I’ve seen some of those videos from Navy pilots, and I must
tell you that they are quite eyebrow-raising when you look at them."

And, from that same interview:

But I think some of the phenomena we’re going to be seeing continues to be
unexplained and might, in fact, be some type of phenomenon that is the result
of something that we don’t yet understand and that could involve some type of
activity that some might say constitutes a different form of life.

Now here’s another interview, also with ex US intelligence.

“Is it fair to boil it down to two possibilities, either another country has
leapfrogged the US in technology or extraterrestrial?” Papadopoulos

“Those are the leading hypotheses, yes” Chris Mellon, Former Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence.

And those feel like the two options:

Either it’s a **Breakaway Civilization,** a term introduced to me by [this
excellent post by Jay Springett](https://www.thejaymo.net/long-form/seeing-
through-the-debris/):

The basic idea of the ‘Breakaway Civilization’ is simply that you have a
secret group, a classified group of people, with access to radically advanced
technology, radically advanced science, and they just don’t share it with the
rest of the world. One scientific breakthrough leads to another, and that
leads to another and so on. So the next thing you know, you’ve got a separate
group of humanity that is vastly far beyond the rest of the world.

Or _“far beyond”_ on just a single axis.

I’ve previously talked about this as [orthogonal
innovation](/home/2020/10/07/orthogonal), and in this case it is the
possibility that there is a country, somewhere, that has gone hard on aviation
and aerospace for some decades, and it’s so far beyond what we have now that
we don’t know how to interpret it under current physics. It’s either a
country, or maybe a group from one of the old superpowers that splintered off
50 years ago and found progress but not yet been reabsorbed.

_Or, it’s aliens._

From the Jerusalem Post: [Former Israeli space security chief says aliens
exist, humanity not ready.](https://www.jpost.com/omg/former-israeli-space-
security-chief-says-aliens-exist-humanity-not-ready-651405)

This “Galactic Federation” has supposedly been in contact with Israel and the
US for years, but are keeping themselves a secret to prevent hysteria until
humanity is ready.

There’s a related conspiracy theory. Here’s the story of [Eisenhower’s 1954
Meeting With Extraterrestrials](http://www.abidemiracles.com/56789.htm):

On the night and early hours of February 20-21, 1954, while on a ‘vacation’ to
Palm Springs, California, President Dwight Eisenhower went missing and
allegedly was taken to Edwards Air force base for a secret meeting. …

[The event was] the beginning of a series of meetings with different
extraterrestrial races that led to a ‘Greada Treaty’ that was eventually
signed.

After the last few years, I’m reluctant to discount conspiracy theories. Not
as facts per se, but perhaps state-actor-amplified chaff and flare to obscure
adjacent truths.

I’m also reluctant to believe that intelligence officers are ever _ex_
-intelligence officers. I’ve a suspicion that a rogue ex-intelligent officer
would swiftly and quietly become an ex-ex-intelligence officer. But also, if
you wanted to gently trickle information to the public, as a state
intelligence agency, this might be exactly how you would start – whether that
information were the on-ramp to bigger truths or, again, to obscure adjacent
ones.

All of which is interesting because, as part of the Covid-19 relief and
spending bill, signed into law at the end of December 2020, [there was also a
stipulation](https://edition.cnn.com/2021/01/10/us/ufo-report-emergency-
relief-bill-trnd/index.html) (link to CNN) for a "180-day countdown for US
intelligence agencies to tell Congress what they know about UFOs."

180 days.

So, end of June it is.

_We speculate to anticipate._

There was the small chance of supply chain disruption from a “no deal” Brexit
– so we cached a small larder of groceries in the cupboard upstairs to hedge
against that possibility. As it happens our cache covered us usefully when
there was the run on the supermarkets, at the beginning of the first Covid
lockdown. Unintended but helpful.

Serious question:

If you accept that there is the small possibility that we will soon find out
that there are UFOs, whether aliens or advanced aviation, then how, as a
rational individual, should you behave?

Assuming there’s a Breakaway Civilisation with new physics, perhaps a clever
solution to the fluid dynamics equations, discovered by luck in the 1950s, a
[glitch](/home/2020/10/27/glitch) that makes low-energy aeronautics possible –
a way of bouncing off chaotic, artificial vortices in the atmosphere that is
in a practical sense indistinguishable from antigravity…

…if _new physics_ were to be announced in late June, with another country way
out ahead, do you _buy_ Lockheed Martin stock today, or do you _sell_ it?

Or if there are aliens:

Aliens likely indicate faster-than-light travel, which has implications for
the current max speed of computation, so I wouldn’t put any faith in
cryptocurrency (as it could soon be counterfeited). And actually, you might
want to opt out of the global economy entirely, as it might soon be
drastically shocked by new technology, so you should keep your wealth in the
fundamentals instead. Not gold, as the supply could radically increase (and
the price plummet) due to mining in the Asteroid Belt. Perhaps you would [buy
land](https://www.marketwatch.com/story/bill-gates-is-now-the-largest-
farmland-owner-in-america-11610818582)?
