# Ulysses and other apps for writing

A quick plug for the Mac app [Ulysses](http://ulyssesapp.com) which has
totally upended my writing workflow in the last few months. Brilliant – the
first tool I’ve found that fits the way I work.

My previous writing workflow in a nutshell:

This blog uses [Markdown](https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/) for
formatting posts, and I wrote my own blog engine. The engine has changed
multiple times, but the data - my posts - remain the same. For quick
presentations I use [Deckset](http://www.decksetapp.com) which lets me make +
present great looking slides fast, also using Markdown from plain text files.

So I’m pretty choosey, and my flow is pretty well established.

Every so often, I try a more grownup app for writing. Textmate is ok but it’s
made for coding. And more importantly, I can’t get to the docs I’m working on
from my iPad or my phone.

But the Mac apps I’ve found… they’re all about focus. Full screen writing.
Dark backgrounds. I don’t focus when I write, I’m all over the place. I like
to have multiple documents on the go, and often multiple projects.

Enter _Ulysses._

Ulysses is plain-text first, with Markdown for formatting. There’s a learning
curve, and then it’s simple: All my text sits in a single library that I’ve
organised into projects. Within each project, there are notes both short and
long. There’s a prominent search field, and when I look at the Ulysses library
on disk, I can find the text files.

I’ve added my blog as an “external folder” – to publish, I drag a file from my
main library onto it, and sync.

But importantly, it just feels right. I open it and continue writing. I don’t
have to think about what to call this file and where to save it, but equally I
don’t need to be concerned about mixing up my work projects and my personal
projects.

What’s convinced me to make this a permanent part of my workflow is that I’m
on the [Ulysses for iOS beta](http://ulyssesapp.com/blog/2015/12/ulysses-
iphone-beta/) and it’s _great._ The library syncs automatically. Being able to
access my longer docs while I’m on the bus (which, it turns out, is where I do
most of my thinking) and add notes directly to those projects… fantastic.
Drafting blog posts while I’m on the tube, in a familiar text editor? So good.

So yeah – an enthusiastic plug for [Ulysses](http://ulyssesapp.com). Thanks!

All of that said: I don’t think I would have looked outside my current
workflow except that I sat down with [Dinah
Sanders](http://www.dinahsanders.com) and she generously showed me how she
uses [Scrivener](https://www.literatureandlatte.com/scrivener.php), which is
the go-to app for authors of proper books.

While I’m not using Scrivener (Ulysses is similar and I’m too committed to my
text files…), Dinah opened my eyes to using process and organisation as part
of writing. Currently I’m constrained by my own working memory. Every time I
try to write a single piece of more than a couple thousand words - fiction or
non-fiction - I get in the swamp. This feels like it’s helping.
