# Unoffice Hours: what it is and how to book a call

For the past month or so, as an experiment, I’ve been opening my calendar each
week for video calls with whoever books a time. It’s been amazing. Wednesday
is now my favourite day.

I’m calling it **Unoffice Hours.** _(Everything that works needs a name.)_

[You can book 30 minutes in my calendar
here.](https://calendly.com/mwie/30min) No agenda required, no need to mail
first.

I set aside a couple hours each ~~Wednesday~~ Monday for Unoffice Hours. The
23 conversations I’ve had since the start of August run the gamut:

And those are all good, so feel free. I’ll keep this going for a while.

Now _office hours_ is an old idea. Here’s some history from a 2009 piece in
the _Harvard Business Review:_

The concept of “office hours” for business goes back to a universal ritual
from our college days. We’d take classes with professors who were busy,
distracted from teaching with research in the lab or the library, and
otherwise remote and unapproachable. But we knew that for a couple of hours,
at least one day a week, we could stop by their office, ask for advice, try
out an idea, and get the guidance we needed.

The article tracks the evolution of office hours into tech, with people
opening their calendars for networking and mentoring. It’s pretty common now.

Office hours have become in a staple in startup support. [Here’s how office
hours worked for me](/home/2018/04/20/reflections-4) when I was running the
R/GA Ventures accelerators in London.

So why _un_ -office hours?

Well, I’m not in an office, for one…

This all started because of lockdown and because [I was missing the
serendipity of grabbing coffee](/home/2020/08/05/serendipity_machine).

I loved those open conversations over coffee in the Before Times. There’s an
ostensible reason to connect, so you talk about work, or compare notes about
an idea, or whatever. But then the unexpected emerges. (Sometimes you have to
hunt for it.) There are things in your head that you only know are there when
you say them. And there are encounters with new ideas and new perspectives.
1:1 conversation is a vital part of my process in finding work, but also
simply in thinking.

But with us all going remote in a giant [forced experiment](https://www.ben-
evans.com/benedictevans/2020/4/13/covid-and-forced-experiments), I wasn’t
getting that input. Could it work over Zoom? It turns out it can. And
[Calendly](https://calendly.com) is a genius service to allow online booking
and have the meeting appear automagically in your Google Calendar.

_(One tip if you do this yourself: schedule the calls for 30 minutes, but add
a 15 minute buffer after each. Otherwise you’ll have to end calls super
abruptly.)_

So I’m not in an office.

Secondly, the heritage of office hours is about professors and students. And
it’s not about that hierarchy for me: grabbing coffee - my model for this - is
an informal meeting of _peers._ The _un-_ is there to signal that difference.
The purpose, instead, is **manufactured serendipity.**

I know there are a few other folks doing this too. Call it _Unoffice Hours,_
let’s make it a movement!

I’ve added a link to this post to the sidebar on my website. It’s there if
you’d like to chat. See you on the zooms.

**Update October 2024:**

Four years on, I’m still doing these! To date I’ve had _(checks Calendly)_ 383
bookings, probably ~340 actual calls.

Unoffice Hours has been a wildly successful experiment for me. I’ve reviewed
pitch decks, given early product and go-to-market feedback, met monks,
discussed work and careers with students, re-met old school friends from two
decades ago, been dropped into surprise design crits, cracked complex
technical architecture challenges, heard about pilgrimage in India and
children’s playgrounds in Finland, compared notes with like-minded people who
I never would have met otherwise – and also compared notes with people with
vastly different life experience. I’ve learnt so much.

Sometimes I even feel like I’ve been able to help. By being a second pair of
eyes on what the other person sees as ordinary, or even tangled and
overwhelming, we can identify a way forward or point of focus for a project or
artistic practice.

Although this started as a lockdown experiment, I found it became the
highlight of my week. So I never stopped.

[There was a recent thread on Hacker
News](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=41756398) (which is what prompted
me adding this update).

[There is an Unoffice Hours webring](https://unofficehours.com) listing other
people with open calendars – check it out and maybe even start doing this
yourself. It has worked wonderfully well for me.
