# I’m speaking at a couple of events over the next few weeks

Actual physical in-person events! Speaking IRL!

I’m part of the group session _How to Use a Computer_ which aims to

reintroduce ourselves to our computers, in order to welcome the exotic
feelings of joy, wonder, and empathy that comes from interacting with the
machine and each other.

I’m going to (briefly) trace a path from the instant gratification of the
search box through to a more collaborative vision of human-machine
interaction, by way of algorithms and Pac-Man.

The conference program looks great. I’m especially looking forward to the
Spatial Computer session on Tuesday ("VR, AR, metaverse, and other
superimposed realities") and the two talks on Wednesday morning around
ecological thinking. Intrigued by this: "What would nature say if it had a
vote in your next board meeting?"

The full program is on the website: [The Conference
2022](https://2022.theconference.se). Tickets are still available.

I spoke at dConstruct way back in 2007 and I’m delighted to be back for this
one-off. (Back then I built my own handheld gadget to control zooming-user-
interface slides using a hacked wiimote. It was far too much stress. I’m just
going to use Keynote this time.)

I’m going to talk generally around **tools for togetherness** which is my new
framing for my long-running territory of general curiosity: how can we be
together online, what we can do there, what it does to us, what are the design
considerations, etc.

It riffs off Howard Rheingold’s 1980s coinage “tools for thought” (from [his
book of that name](https://www.rheingold.com/texts/tft/)) which carries us
from Engelbart’s perspective that led to the invention of the PC through to
the fluorescence of new epistemic tools that we’re seeing today.

I’m one of eight speakers – there’s a robotic artist, a neuroscientist, and a
calligrapher. It should be an excellent day.

The conference website: [dConstruct 2022](https://2022.dconstruct.org).
Tickets are still available.

Come say hi if you’re also at either thing.
