# I wrote a story and you can read it

I’ve [mentioned here
before](http://interconnected.org/home/2017/08/17/upsideclown) that I’m part
of a writing group called **Upsideclown.** We take it in turns to write short
fiction, and I’m up today!

It’s a gentle tale of extraterrestrial visitations, and of rekindling old
friendships. Here’s a taster:

Petr held the Scotch egg still between thumb and forefinger, and cut it
carefully in two. They sat in the library cafe. He placed the symmetrical
halves side by side on the plate, two halves of egg in two half balls of
sausage, centred on yellow yolks.

‘The Dogon people, in Mali,’ said Bruno, eying Petr’s lunch, ‘were visited by
aliens from the Sirius star system.’

‘And you find somewhere scenic for the presenter to stand while they say
this,’ said Petr, ‘so nobody notices how absurd it is.’

**Read:** [The search for another
intelligence](http://upsideclown.com/2017-12-04), by me, at Upsideclown.

#

I’m rusty at writing fiction so I’m loving being part of this rebooted writing
group. But I’m also particularly pleased at how this story came out for a
couple of reasons:

So yeah. Learning the craft. It’s not my best story by any means, but right
now it’s the one I’m pleased with most.

So I’ve now written FOUR whole stories for my short fiction writing group,
[Upsideclown](http://upsideclown.com). ICYMI in August last year, we started
publishing again [after a 14 year
hiatus](http://interconnected.org/home/2017/08/17/upsideclown).

I wanted to collect links to my four stories in one place. = this blog post.

I wouldn’t say I’m great at writing fiction. I find it tough. It is the
easiest thing in the world for me to pick holes in what I’ve written. So
instead, as an exercise–and as some personal positive reinforcement–I want to
remind myself what I learnt writing each one, and also what I like.

**[Moving House](http://upsideclown.com/2017-08-29)** (August 2017)

We sat atop Parliament Hill as the sun went down, London lapping at our feet,
glass of wine in hand, a hard red line on the horizon fading not to black but
the glow of LED streetlamps diffused through the humid breath of our ten
million neighbours.

I love the way scenes ping pong between two different time periods, immediate
and past, and I _love_ the punchiness of last two lines.

But goodness is it dense like a compacted shit. You can tell that I hadn’t
written for years, and had been attempting to peristaltically emit this
particular story for most of that time. The ideas are given zero room to
breathe. When I read it back, there are concepts in shorthand that flower in
my head–but there are no clues available for anyone else.

One thing I like:

**[The search for another intelligence](http://upsideclown.com/2017-12-04)**
(December 2017)

Bruno had been approached to do background colour for “3,114 B.C. and All
That,” an upcoming TV series on the conspiracy theories centred on that year.
The dawn of the Mayan calendar; the mysterious construction of Stonehenge.
Docu-entertainment. ‘Docu-bullshit,’ he had replied but he took the work. The
chance to get closer to TV producers again, that had been why he did it.

Oh gosh I like this one. The best of the four.

This marks the first time I have _ever_ written fiction in a conscious and
deliberate fashion: I had an idea; realised it needed to cross over with an
emotional journey so added that; sketched it out in a series of lines; blocked
those lines out into scenes; wrote each scene properly; and then revised. It
was also the first time I ever managed to write a story over approx. 1,000
words.

Previously all my writing has been automatic: wait for the muse, then type
until my mind goes too fast for my hands or I need to pee. Great when it
works, but a local maximum in terms of quality. My goal in writing with this
group is to learn the craft.

I’m pleased at how the scenes work: I don’t spend excess time getting into
them (you know the [Wadsworth Constant](http://knowyourmeme.com/memes/the-
wadsworth-constant) where you can no-fear skip the first 30% of any YouTube
video? I tried to internalise that). And I tried to finish each on something
that would provide impulse to read the following.

I spent time working on the characters for this one. I have an idea about who
Bruno and Hope are, with character notes too. I was brutal with myself about
making sure I understood their motivation at every point-and then being
rigorous to ensure that every other action was true to that required
motivation.

The ending is poignant, although maybe a little cheap.

It’s also exposition heavy. The story doesn’t work without a ton of
explaining. And given that the emotional journey leans heavily on human
fundamentals… well, I perhaps should be stretching myself more. Pop songs are
always love songs. But there are maybe more interesting anchors.

Still, it works, and if I would change anything it would be to make it
slightly less abrupt in places, and to ease up on the background. As yet I
lack the skill to revise (I can tweak words but I haven’t figured out how to
have the distance to re-write scenes) but this is one I’ll come back to.

**[The Ursa Major Moving Group](http://upsideclown.com/2018-03-06)** (March 2018)

It happened regularly, thought Ant, this premonition of the end of living, the
Grim Reaper’s breath every six months or so, and every time it left Ant
untethered and terrified, driven to his studio to use his eyes and use his
hands. Twice a year or more he was picked off his feet by who-knows-what and
swept up the beach, left gasping when the wave retreated, shivering and
exposed.

As his own death had become a familiar acquaintance, at some point in the last
decade, layered underneath as the swell is beneath the waves, Ant had met
something slower and longer, tidal and from beyond the horizon, something
entirely deadlier and more final, the echo from the deep future of the end of
humanity itself.

Good grief I hated writing this story.

I had something written in my notes–a pun on an astronomical feature, the Ursa
Major Moving Group–and it lodged in me to the point that literally nothing
else could get out of my fingers. So this took a month to force out.

Building on the previous stories, I used outlines and characters… but really
Ant is the only one I understand. Even he doesn’t have much depth.

Is it any good? Who the hell knows. I like the first half. The second
half–which bounds forward I’m not kidding 10,000 years in nine short scenes-is
far, far too dense. This second half is framed almost entirely in a dream, and
this was a solution to a particular conundrum. But it doesn’t feel nearly
hallucinatory enough to be believable, or have enough story for you to get
engaged in it for its own sake.

The conundrum was how to reach a particular concluding feeling that Ant has of
betrayal, envy, and acceptance. You know, I think it works for that. I’ve been
fascinated for a while by [the story of Augustus and
Caesarion](http://interconnected.org/home/2016/02/01/caesarion) and how it
might have actually felt–I’m not quite there, but it’s a rich seam.

So what I liked here? There was a certain complicated feeling I wanted to
arrive at. Tick.

**[Volume Five](http://upsideclown.com/2018-05-29)** (May 2018)

At 3am he woke up with the heavy taste of whisky still in his mouth, cheek
stuck to the pillow. Sophie was in the other room, in their bedroom. The flat
was quiet. The streetlamp outside shone through the naked window onto the
diary left open on the spare room bed.

It was the fifth volume. He didn’t remember looking at that. It was open to
the page for June 5th, one week from today’s date.

Leo blinked gummy sleep from his eyes. Where the page should have been blank,
there was a single sentence: Leo gets a job.

This story went up a couple days back so maybe I don’t have the distance… but
I’m kinda not a fan, and kinda totally am. It mundane; the characters are one-
dimensional; there’s nothing clever about how the narrative works; I wrote it
in a rush.

But. But there’s an actual story here. It’s not a story that relies on my
usual cheap go-tos: huge epiphany; lengthy exposition; plumbing the depths of
human agony _and/or_ ecstasy. That was the challenge I set myself-to tell a
good old fashioned story with zero frilly bits-and it’s the first time I’ve
managed to do that. (Well, actually I wanted to write a ghost story, avoiding
sci-fi, and while it’s not quite a ghost story it is in the right direction.)

Technically I enjoy the way the scenes move. My sketched outline had more
detail, but the final story hides and reveals, hides and reveals, in a way
that propels it along. That’s a little bit of craft I’ve picked up from the
previous three stories, and it felt easier this time.

What don’t I like? The characters and their motivations could be better
understood. The situations could have more texture. Structurally something
more exotic could be going on. The emotional journey could wrestle a little
with the narrative.

In particular, the words could use poetry. My self-set personal challenge has
been to steer clear of fancy words. Abandon any and all crutches to force me
to concentrate on story and dialogue. I think, over the last year and these
four stories, I’ve done that enough… but now I find myself wondering where my
voice is and how to reintroduce it. It’s one thing writing blog posts, like
this, but I’d love to find the same fluency and style in fiction over which I
deliberate.

Enough with the self congratulatory introspection.

**TL;DR:** I’m enjoying writing again enormously. I feel like I’m learning
some lego bricks that with a bunch more practice might one day evolve into
actual craft. Hopefully a few people are enjoying reading these stories too.

Hey and let me not take away from the other authors! There are SEVEN of us in
the writing group, six who are writing regularly. Check out [the whole
archive](http://upsideclown.com/#archive) since the reboot. It is legit good
shit.
