# The user interface of Seldon’s Plan

Seldon’s plan is a future map of humanity, from the collapse of the first
galactic empire to the establishment of the second, a thousand years in the
future. It is developed according to psychohistory, and named after the father
of this new science and of the plan itself: Hari Seldon. Psychohistory is a
kind of statistical mechanics to predict the behaviour of large populations,
and using the plan a secret organisation shapes the destiny of the galaxy
towards this Second Empire. The seed of the future empire is a society named
the Foundation, on a planet named Terminus, and the secret organisation -
tasked to improve the plan and from its hidden vantage point manipulate
humanity - is called the Second Foundation, unknown by the first and
established by Seldon himself.

This story is told in the science fiction books of the [Foundation
series](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foundation_series) by Isaac Asimov, a
space opera classic.

What fascinates me is the _user interface_ by which the Plan is read and
explored by “Speakers” – the secret members/academics/bureaucrats of the
Second Foundation. It is projected on the wall as a network of dense,
interlocking equations by a device named the “Prime Radiant,” and manipulated
using a combination of gestural interface and thought control. Black equations
were part of the original Seldon plan; red is used for those added by
Speakers; blue is where unanticipated deviations from the plan have occurred.

I’ve taken two extracts which describe the Prime Radiant and the visualisation
of the Plan from the books _Second Foundation_ and _Foundation’s Edge._ [Read
the extracts
here.](http://interconnected.org/home/more/2012/03/seldonsplan.html)
