# Mars problems vs Venus problems

Perhaps there’s life on Venus. There’s [phosphine gas in the cloud decks of
Venus](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41550-020-1174-4) and it should break
down pretty quickly, so there’s something replenishing it. The scientists
can’t think of any abiotic processes that would create phosphine in that
quantity, so maybe microbes it is?

I’m sceptical. There was similar excitement in 1996 about the Martian
meteorite [Allan Hills 84001](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Allan_Hills_84001)
– microscopic fossils! Life! Well, pseudo-fossils.

More likely explanation: planetary geology is weird. _(“Geo”-logy? I’m not
sure what the appropriate word is.)_

Going to check out Venus will be tough.

There was a great paper in _JBIS_ in April: [Conceptual Design of a Crewed
Platform in the Venusian
Atmosphere](https://www.jbis.org.uk/paper/2020.73.115) (abstract only). It
summarises two comprehensive studies of how to float crewed scientific
missions in the clouds of Venus. The mock-ups look like a cross between
dirigibles and the space station. Alien.

Because Venus is _fierce._

[Here are the first colour photos from the surface of
Venus](https://www.space.com/18551-venera-13.html), taken by the Soviet lander
_Venura 13_ in 1982. It lasted 127 minutes. And: "Venera 14, a twin of Venera
13, launched five days later and also reached the surface. It lasted there for
57 minutes." A lander dropped by _Vega 2_ (1985) lasted 56 minutes. There have
been no landings since.

Remote observation of the Venusian surface is not possible due to its thick
clouds of sulphuric acid. It has a surface atmospheric pressure 90x that of
Earth, and a surface temperature averaging 464C/867F.

In terms of size and gravity, Venus is Earth’s twin.

Venus is trying to kill you. It’s dense and impenetrable – there could be a
whole civilisation a mile away, and you’d never know.

Venus is Joseph Conrad’s [Heart of
Darkness](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heart_of_Darkness), the hidden Africa,
unknown to Europeans – the novella that was translated to Vietnam for
_Apocalypse Now._ A journey up the Congo River and into the psyche. Both book
and film highly recommended.

_Contrast with Mars._

Which is empty (at least in the imagination). Tabula rasa. It’s dangerous,
sure, but in a character-building, life-at-the-frontier kind of way. It’s
there, waiting for Will to be imposed on it.

And Mars is _so_ explored in fiction, and I mean this modern conception of
Mars, not the old one which was criss-crossed with canals and dotted with
ancient civilisations. Mars, now, is a blank canvas for the imagination.

So no wonder Elon Musk has Mars as his goal. It’s a place for pure expansion.

A city on Mars will be like a city on Earth but with better AC.

And I think it has diminished us somehow to have Mars held up in the public
imagination as the ultimate frontier. Because all other problems become
versions of that grand yet _simple_ model frontier, empty spaces that we pave
over.

But Venus…

Venus is far from empty. Venus has its own agenda. It has an oppressive air
and acid rain. Landers are destroyed in an hour. If humans go there, we’ll be
the ones who have to change, not Venus.

Which is a very 2020s metaphor.

**Climate change, inequality, pandemics** – these problems won’t be resolved
by paving over them, no matter how much Will we exert.

They will be negotiated, worked at; they’re obdurate and incredibly complex,
and require an acceptance of ground truths that are bigger and stronger than
us and can’t be ignored. We won’t fix them, we’ll have to learn about them and
deal with them in a million different ways and sometimes we’ll have to appease
them. We’re mortal in the face of them. Through the mist and the jungle that
crowds the boat, eyes look back, eyes belonging to who-know-what staring out
from an unknown land which goes back who-knows-how-deep, and so we push on, we
adapt.

The solutions are not straightforward. They require something from us. A price
must be paid.

I think we don’t think about Venus because it’s the part of us which is
animal, it’s the part which we keep hidden, the un-modern, it scares us to
know it’s there; because if we _really_ were to live on Venus, we would have
to become something Other, and we can’t tolerate what that might be. Not like
Mars which is manageable, already mapped and all that’s left to argue about is
the collection of property taxes.

I would like to imagine more stories about Venus and how we would live there.

Because the challenges of the 2020s are Venus problems, not Mars problems.

_**Update 24/9:** It’s an odd experience seeing one of my back-of-the-notebook
posts briefly hit the top spot on Hacker News. 5,000 views later… [There’s a
long discussion here.](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=24566972)
Currently 186 comments, wonderfully including [this
one](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=24569544) that disagrees yet sums up
this whole post better than I could: "The challenges of exploring
Venus/searching for life are metaphorically similar to current issues here on
Earth (climate change, SARS-Cov2, etc.), while Mars represents the endless
expansion/frontier attitudes of 18th-20th century mercantilism/capitalism."_
