# Visual FX and cultivating a sense of wonder

A few months ago, I ran across this behind-the-scenes look at some astounding
sci-fi visual FX:

**[VFX Breakdown - Dynamo Dream
Teaser](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FFJ_THGj72U)** (YouTube, 2m27s).

The artist: Ian Hubert.

It shows the actors and camera tracking on the green screen, and then the
final scene CGI rendered using Blender, a fantastically detailed and perfectly
seamless 3D world. (The body rotation in the last few seconds that becomes a
camera rotation in the rendered version is _:chefs-kiss-emoji:_)

So that was a teaser, and the first episode of the series came out!

**[Episode 1 : Salad Mug - DYNAMO
DREAM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsGZ_2RuJ2A)** (YouTube, 21m31s).

There’s some background:

The series is a mix of live-action and CGI that follows a salad merchant on a
seemingly normal day through the dense streets of the Sunset District, a
futuristic metropolis filled with fax machine drones, giant mutant crabs
blocking traffic, and flying assassin bots.

Two moments early in this first episode:

Wow.

It’s all artificial – simulations, created hand-in-hand by the animator and
the machine.

Does the camera actually hold a microsecond longer so I can appreciate these
shots? Or does it just _appear_ to linger because I know that these shots are
understated VFX flourishes from a virtuoso, and so my attention is amplified?
A little of both I guess.

Look, I’m not religious. But part of what I imagine it’s like to have faith
that there is a singular creator of the world is that your attention holds,
amazed, gecko-tacky on every effervescent facet of nature _all the time._

Or not. Back when I studied physics, I would certainly go through periods
where I would fugue out looking at my hands and thinking about electrons, or
equivalently computers and transistors (condensed matter physics is wild). But
it doesn’t last. Maybe that’s for the best.

But still I wonder about how to cultivate a sense of continuous partial wonder
such that it is more likely that something in the everyday will catch you,
just every so often. Perhaps that is one of the functions of keeping an
observational diary, or of prayer.

Perhaps it could be a pill. Microdosing cathedrals.
