# Let’s think of some new vices to tax

A decent portion of government revenue is at risk of declining, which gives an
opportunity (a) think about what tax is for; and, (b) propose some taxes on
Big Tech.

**Vices.** The traditional ones are alcohol, tobacco, and gambling. UK tax
revenue in 2019-20 is forecast at £742.1b
([source](https://www.ukpublicrevenue.co.uk/year_revenue_2020UKbf_17bc1n_40634142F144#ukgs302)).
Vice taxes made up:

Total vice taxes: £24.4b. That’s 3.3% of government tax revenue!

_Sources unless otherwise specified: Office for Budget Responsibility[Economic
and fiscal outlook, Nov 2020](https://obr.uk/efo/economic-and-fiscal-outlook-
november-2020/) (table 3.3) and the [Tax by tax](https://obr.uk/forecasts-in-
depth/tax-by-tax-spend-by-spend/) section._

In comparison to other taxes: vice is equivalent to 18% of VAT (sales tax;
£133.8b). And vice is a little over _half_ what corporation tax is worth
(£48b).

What does vice buy us? The entire BBC seven times over, or 10% of the welfare
budget.

But there those stories about millennials and zoomers drinking less, and
tobacco is already becoming seriously unfashionable – that makes me think we
should consider seriously whether vice taxes will drop off a cliff.

One question is: why tax vices at all? The intention is only partially to
dissuade: if that were the goal, you would ban it. I don’t know about you, but
I _like_ booze, cigs, and betting. I haven’t smoked for years, but what’s life
without a vice or two.

(I’ve not included the Soft Drinks Industry Levy which brings in £0.3b, not
VAT collected on the goods above.)

We tax vices because there is individual utility but a society incurs a cost,
either in healthcare, or maintaining order, or productivity, or something
else. Which I think is a fair trade.

But there’s another activity with high societal cost.

**Carbon and the environment.** The figures here for 2019-20:

Total environmental taxes: £34.2b. 4.6% of revenue! Comparable to vices.

I’m not sure I’d say that carbon is a vice itself… though maybe? Carbon is a
vice for industry? That’s a metaphor that could work.

_(I’ve not included Environmental Levies at £8b as these appear to be intended
to restructure the wholesale energy market and go straight out again.)_

Two immediate observations:

So revenue from environmental taxes, _if_ they were high enough to do the job
of dissuasion, would be declining. We can’t bank on those taxes either.

All of which makes me ask: where’s the money going to come from in the future?

What are taxes for? An economist or political scientist would have a typology,
but let me guess:

The last of these is the most interesting to me. I’d not thought about taxes
in that way before.

Let’s say that vice taxes and environmental taxes decline over the next
decade.

What new vices do we tax to create, say, 1% of all tax revenues? (i.e. £7.4b,
just under the tobacco duty tax.)

**Big Tech?**

I suggest Big Tech because there are a lot of calls for regulation but, [as
I’ve detailed before](/home/2020/06/29/problems_with_big_tech), I don’t
believe it’s a good idea to have unconsidered, blunt instrument regulation
(such as a “Digital Tax,” ugh). Better to have in mind _specific_ issue which
is a problem, and a hypothesis about how a given intervention will provide a
remedy without over-reaching.

_With that in mind:_

I think we could make an argument that

are both mis-balanced in terms of individual benefit vs societal benefit. NOT
that they are bad, merely that where the benefits and costs fall is out of
whack. Like, scrolling Facebook is great! But it turns out that the thing to
create the dopamine hit is also a radicalisation engine. Maybe we’re fine with
that: cars are fun but they’re also polluting death machines, and we use taxes
and regulation to distribute the load until it feels equitable.

_Two ideas for new taxes!_

**1\. Engagement Levy**

Tax the app front end, which after all is the system that asks for user
consent to collect data. Could you charge Twitter, or Snapchat, or Facebook
based on usage measured in app-hours in the UK? Make it progressive based on
an exponential: the more users who are touched, and the more hours, the higher
the levy paid.

**2\. Anti Microtargeting Duty**

On the one hand ad targeting helps businesses economically find customers; on
the other it is a giant attack surface for dark propaganda. This is a classic
duty: make sure the societal cost is reflected in the price paid by the
advertisers. Put a duty on paid ads of, say, 1 penny, but don’t make it per
impression, make it per _bid._ If you can find a way to reach people with
fewer bids (i.e. less targeted) then you pay less.

I think we can ask the same rebalancing question of other new businesses.

Like: **e-commerce.** It’s hazardous for neighbourhood shopping. But, as we’ve
learnt during Covid, it’s also vital resilience for the nation. So maybe the
issue is homogeneity. How can that be taxed specifically?

Or: **the gig economy.** Uber is great for getting around town, and at least
some drivers love the independence and flexibility. But the method of
employment is freeloading on the state-provided welfare safety net. So what’s
a duty that puts the cost back on that method of employment?

And then back to vices:

It’s telling that betting and gaming revenues have doubled in the last decade.
Dopamine is the new alcohol. We’re swimming it in as a society, it’s
normalised.

But there are dopamine triggers that aren’t taxed: so-called [free-to-play
games](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free-to-play). They’re engagement farms
sticking micro-transaction sap spiles in their players. Coins, crates, and
gems, whatever.

Tax these games like casinos.
