# Now people are comfortable with video

I wonder what businesses become possible now that people are comfortable with
streaming video.

I’ve started doing the [9am P.E. with Joe
workouts](https://www.thebodycoach.com/blog/pe-with-joe-1254.html) on YouTube.
30 minutes of exercise is barely compensating for running (it’s hard to find
pedestrian-free routes round here), but it’s great to get the heart going,
this Joe Wicks guy is warm and genuine, and our toddler - although she isn’t
old enough to join in - seems to love it too, charging round the room. Long
story short, I’d never done live workouts through the TV before and now I
have.

(I try not to think about the [telescreen workouts in 1984](http://www.george-
orwell.org/1984/2.html) while I’m doing it: "Winston sprang to attention in
front of the telescreen, upon which the image of a youngish woman, scrawny but
muscular, dressed in tunic and gym-shoes, had already appeared.")

And everyone’s using Zoom, and Houseparty.

Getting people to do new things is hard. As popular as YouTube is, and as
popular as Facebook Live is (or Instagram Stories), they’re very consumption
focused, and Netflix
([Bandersnatch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_Mirror:_Bandersnatch)
aside) is still TV.

So getting people to do _two_ new things is impossible. Getting people to
group chat by video, okay, but group chat by video and _also_ [watch
football](https://www.sceenic.co)? Niche. So far.

EXCEPT.

Now the first hurdle has been removed. Everyone will take for granted the idea
that you can watch a live video stream in a group of 500,000 and have live
shout-outs from the comments. Or have a group video chat in which friends can
drop by. My mum (who is pretty technical, sure) is now playing bridge with her
friends over Zoom.

So now what businesses be layered on this mode of interaction?

Doctor consultations, that’s already happening.

Personal shopping, how could that work? How would an artisan farmer’s market
work? What about touring Venice by telepresence robot? What if BBC iPlayer
launched Houseparty meets DVD box sets?

Could I invite a live sports channel into Zoom with me and my friends? Or a
brand new movie?

Technically, we’ll need to plug together three things to make ideas like this
happen:

Anyway.
