# Imagining the first global Simulation War

I’ve been imagining a future global war where nobody is killed, no city is
attacked, and it’s conducted entirely in simulation – unless and until it can
become real.

I haven’t played Go much but it feels like a game of frozen anticipations. You
anticipate what the other might do, in their attempt to enclose you, and you
place a stone to prevent that. And they do the same. So the entire game board
becomes this network of cautious concrete counter-plays to imagined threats.
It’s like you spend most of the game negotiating the landscape of the game to
come.

But if at any point you see a sequence where you can enclose your opponent,
and you see that they _haven’t_ anticipated that play, you go for it.

So I imagine that this is what military planning is like.

London is littered with contingencies.

There’s a literal warship parked in the Thames. HMS Belfast. It’s a museum and
tourist destination. But the guns still work – [one is pointed at a motorway
service station](https://londonist.com/2015/02/why-do-the-guns-of-hms-belfast-
point-at-a-motorway-service-station) 11 miles away. Which is amusing, right?
Ha ha. And also a little nod to any country that has contemplated invading
London. I bet there’s a freeze-dried plan for how the Belfast would be re-
commissioned, and somebody somewhere knows to the hour how long that would
take.

Then the big parks, which are beautiful and well maintained. Great for
bivouacking large numbers of troops. I bet that’s another plan. In the Second
World War, [Hyde Park was used to grow
vegetables](https://www.royalparks.org.uk/whats-on/blog/digging-deep-for-
victory-the-royal-parks-in-world-war-two).

I wonder

Possibly not in 2021, right? But London is an ancient city with a long history
and a long future. Maybe you have to plan cities for what the world might be
like in 100 or 200 or 300 years time.

[Rachel Abrams](https://www.turnstoneconsulting.com/about/) shared a paper
with me about urban planning and the drive to suburbia: _Galison, Peter. “War
against the Center.” Grey Room, no. 4, 2001, pp. 7–33. JSTOR,
www.jstor.org/stable/1262556._

Urban planners in the US looked at the devastation of Nagasaki and said, oh
this could happen to us. (Having just done it.) So they looked for
concentrations of, say, the steel industry, or the new computer industry, and
they mandated that major offices were built outside the blast radius if an
atomic bomb were to be dropped a major population centre. And so you have
suburbia to serve those offices and so on. The strategy was called
_dispersal._

[Here’s the full
PDF.](https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/arts/english/currentstudents/undergraduate/modules/ontheroadtocollapse/syllabus2018_19/gallison_war_against_the_centre.pdf)

BUT what grabbed my attention in this paper was the bombing campaign on Nazi
Germany.

The campaign was guided by the _U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey,_ "an immerse
affair, employing well over a thousand people" – many of them Operations
Analysts.

“Operations analysis” was essentially a methodical theoretical reconstruction
of the interconnections that held together the German economy and war machine
and that asked how it could be blown apart.

And so:

But the operations analysts selecting targets were not just after particular
pieces of munitions factories; their goal was to precipitate a collapse of the
German economy as a whole. To that end, they directed a series of studies
designed to locate just those plants where destruction would cause shortages
to ripple through the entire system. Operations followed. Henry “Hap” Arnold,
for example, tempted Harry Hopkins with the notion that _blasting the German
ball bearing industry “would probably wreck all German industry.”_

Ball bearings! (And indeed that is what the bombing campaign did.)

But this process is exactly what I mean. Reverse engineer an economy, or a
society, or a game-player’s strategy, and figure out the single thread to pull
that unravels the whole thing.

_ASIDE:_

_I took one of those careers quizzes at school when I was 15 or so – we all
had to. Brits of a certain age will remember the DOS quiz with the text-only
interface and a hundred multichoice questions._

_It gave me two possible future careers at the end: Operations Analyst. And
Ceramics. I ended up going to university where I took physics._

_My feeling is that it was spot on, but there was no other way for a quiz
written in the late 80s/early 90s to say “design strategy.”_

I wrote a really-not-very-good short story about this idea years ago. It’s
mostly lumps of exposition glued together with minimum viable narrative.

It’s about a fictional board game played on a map of Southampton. The two
sides are the Council and the Friends.

The moves are called _“counterfactuals”_ and the starting point is always the
actual map of the town.

But it turns out that every play of the game is wargaming an actual, potential
future conflict.

‘The Friends haven’t come this close to having certainty since before the new
shopping centre was built. The Council stole a march on us then, really
changed the board. A great move.’

I’ve never thought of the actual building in Southampton as moves in the game
before.

One play-through reveals that there’s a path for the Friends to win – and so
it all kicks off.

I don’t know why my head is stuck ploughing this global threat-modelling
furrow. But it is: see last year’s post about [space, weather, and other novel
battlegrounds](/home/2020/06/30/space_and_weather).

If I were writing that story today, it wouldn’t be a board game, it would be
AI. There would be AIs constantly wargaming, constantly running the operations
analysis that led to the ball bearing factory target selection.

And maybe that’s part of my fear now? That threat in the 2030s won’t be about
somebody realising that social media propaganda can destabilise a society, or
some organisation spotting the new ability for a computer worm to infiltrate
uranium gas centrifuges and destroy a nuclear program (a decade later and
[nobody has claimed responsibility for
Stuxnet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stuxnet) and its cyberattack on Iran).

The discovery process will be automated.

The probing of the attack surface of society will be automated and a thousand
times faster than anything we’ve seen to date, whether it’s software
engineering or social engineering or knocking out a water treatment plant.
Imagine finding a zero day on the economy.

My hope, my wish, is that this finally makes it unthinkable to have enemies
because any attack would be unreasonably effective, and so the entire world
community embarks on a giant exercises of potlatch and soft propaganda and
diplomacy – aggression and self-defence both become questions of: how to make
friends.

But actually where my head goes is to a future Simulation War, 2030–2070.

A Simulation War conducted entirely virtually, at hyper speed. The arms race
will be measured in an ever-escalating TWPS, trillions of wargames per second,
the computational capacity of a nation devoted to hunting for sequences in
possible futures that lead to a win state before uncertainty takes over.

We won’t know the virtual cold war is happening aside from the real world
moves to change the board itself, the starting conditions. We’ll see weird
urban planning decisions, or bizarre industrial strategy capital allocation
decisions, or modifications to university curricula, or manipulations of the
atmospheric carbon concentration, none of them making sense except in the
context of being moves in the game, anticipated defences in a numerically
critical proportion of future mirrorworlds.
