# Pay-per-use physics models for virtual fashion

How about skin tight t-shirts with tracking markers, especially made for
rendering synthetic shirts with physics-model fabric for wearing on Zoom? And
how would the virtual shirts be priced?

**Problem.** I spend my work days on video calls. For some of those calls, I
wear a shirt. I want to give a good impression, and a shirt is good for that,
but it feels like a waste: I have a limited number of shirts before I have to
take them off to the cleaner. (Getting my shirts cleaned and pressed is my
laundry vice. Generally laundry is my happy place: sorting, folding, all that,
it’s a finite task that I love. But ironing bores me to tears, so I factor
into any shirt purchase the fact that I’ll have to pay for cleaning.)

**Solution.** Virtual fashion.

The concept is that I could wear a skintight t-shirt printed with computer
vision motion tracking markers, semi-reflective patches (to measure ambient
light), and known colour areas (for white balance).

Software on my computer would intercept the webcam signal, and add a virtual
shirt – or a virtual anything else. Using a physics engine, it would have a
full cloth simulation to mimic light or heavy fabrics (the shirt I wear
depends on the season), and adapt to my movement and the light in the room.

The idea is that, for everyone else on the call, the virtual shirt is
indistinguishable from me wearing an actual shirt. Only I have an infinite
wardrobe.

Shirts would be purchased from all the usual designers and retailers: Hugo
Boss or Uniqlo, whatever. Buy as normal, but download the 3D model into your
virtual fashion software, and there’s no physical garment to take to the
cleaners.

This concept at least partially inspired by a recently-purchased all-over-
print [ugly shirt](https://www.wired.co.uk/article/facial-recognition-t-shirt-
block): "a ridiculous-looking garment that magically renders the wearer
invisible to CCTV."

[Here’s a pic of me in the t-shirt.](https://www.instagram.com/p/CGVY7npJ043/)
Ostensibly the pattern confuses the facial recognition algorithms of a certain
brand of CCTV camera. [This article talks more about the
patterns](https://medium.com/ai-in-plain-english/these-hoodies-and-
sweatshirts-can-fool-surveillance-algorithms-and-make-you-
invisible-7bb360c7fc2c) and links to the original paper.

So if there are patterns that computers see badly, are there patterns that
computers see really, really well, and what would you do with that? Hence a
motion cap shirt for virtual fashion.

The question is: how would you price a virtual shirt? Is it a one-off
purchase, or perhaps a subscription to a virtual wardrobe?

For me, the key difference with garments (over, say, music) is that’s it’s
possible to spend more on the material itself and that expense is visible to
the trained eye.

Sure, expensive material can mean it hangs better, or lasts longer, or
whatever. But high fashion doesn’t always do those things. And sometimes
exactly what you want is a low-cost basic: higher price doesn’t always mean
_better._

So what unfakeably expensive material provides, if nothing else is a
meaningful foundation for wide price differences, and that gives rise to
exclusivity, brands, and all the rest.

How to replicate all of that with virtual fashion?

With virtual garments, there’s no meaningful reason to price a Prada shirt
differently from a no-brand one. The design maybe? But the value of design is
down to personal preference; there will be no consensus on what should cost
more and what should cost less.

UNLESS: The true difference between virtual garments is down to the quality of
the simulation.

A simulation with more compute thrown at it can and will look better. Throw a
better GPU (the chip responsible for rendering the graphics) at the rendering
problem, and the virtual shirt will be higher resolution, run at a higher
frame rate, and the cloth will hang more authentically. It gets rendered once,
on your machine, and then everyone else on the video calls gets to see it. And
better GPUs do indeed cost more. Nobody else needs an expensive CPU, but
they’ll definitely be able to tell that you spend a lot on yours.

The difficulty is that the GPU is bundled with your laptop or smartphone. Any
virtual garment, high end or low end, gets rendered with the same chip.
Quality difference is eliminated.

So how about this, to open up the economics of virtual fashion:

Speculatively bundle the absolutely best available GPU in every laptop and
every phone. But don’t activate its full capabilities, and don’t pass the cost
onto the consumer at the time of purchase. _Instead_ allow virtual garments
(which are just 3D models in physics simulations, don’t forget) to pay to
unlock levels of capability on a per-model basis.

The 3D model designer would pay the GPU manufacturer directly. Perhaps they
pay a per-unit fee with a multiple that takes into account model complexity
and level of desired verisimilitude.

The consumer, purchasing the 3D model, would pay the designer. When they use
the item, the GPU is unlocked for that item only. The consumer would _not_ be
able to purchase a garment and then choose how much rendering power to give
it.

Instead of an upfront GPU purchase, this is a pay-per-use model.

It would allow for purchasing cheap virtual shirts that look ok, and expensive
virtual shirts that look shimmering, amazing, and computationally profligate.

_(What do we call this? Speculative economics?)_

I wonder what high fashion would look like in this world?

Anything that requires top-end GPU capabilities I imagine: lots of
reflections, lots of crinkles and complexity on the surface, and lots of semi
transparent layers, all falling in interesting (and expensively) crumpled
folds.

_And then_ I wonder whether real-life fashion would end up mimicking the
virtual? Would high-end garments end up using ordinarily-priced material… but
all designed to appear especially difficult to render in simulation?

All of which is to say: I would pay money for an actual t-shirt which is
designed to be hard to visually simulate. Do let me know if you make one.
