# The Voder in 1939 and high-bandwidth input devices

Computers are pretty low bandwidth when it comes to input. Fingers and and a
couple square feet of looking, less with a phone. And not even much nuance.
Swipes and taps, no vibrato or punching or feeling texture.

Back in the day, the [Voder](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voder) was the
first device for voice synthesis, invented by Homer Dudley at Bell Labs and
demonstrated by Helen Harper at the 1939 New York World’s Fair.

**[Here’s a video of the Voder in
action](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0rAyrmm7vv0)** (YouTube, 43 sec).

The user interface:

AND SO:

"After months of practice, a trained operator could produce recognizable
speech."

Another article:

It was a difficult and unnatural process, and only between 20-30 people ever
even learned how to use it.

Our phones must see humans as one big eye and one big finger.

But at this point, 78% of the world’s population has used a smartphone. When
can these tiny computers stop catering for new users by default?

Like, could computer input be full-bodied, high bandwidth? I want a computer
which is more like a Voder.

I recently heard about **vim-clutch** which is a foot pedal that makes a
particular text editor even more efficient to use ([this is a great
description from 2018](https://boingboing.net/2018/03/12/the-vim-clutch-a-
footpeda.html) and [here’s the project page](https://github.com/alevchuk/vim-
clutch)).

I think of sewing machines, a device that requires a deftness of touch and
also has a foot pedal, and I wonder whether Helen Harper, being the main Voder
operator and one of the very few people skilled enough to play it, had
experience with one.

I’ve had a taste of high-bandwidth input [controlling my Mac cursor with my
head](/home/2021/03/12/pointer_control) – which I still use from time to time.
My expectation was that I would use head control as an _alternative_ to a
mouse, leaning back, but actually I find myself using the keyboard, mouse,
head cursor, facial expression triggers, and a little speech-to-text dictation
for short phrases all at once. I would like to try a pedal, maybe to switch
between “coarse” and “fine” modes. But the interface isn’t really designed for
this.
