# The Minecraft generation meets property law and AI-synthesised landscapes

Yeah so I have a v loose feeling that, in technology, whatever you encounter
first or do a lot of is “normal” and then you bring that as a template to
whatever you make next.

e.g.

A whole generation grew up in Minecraft. Peak years: early 2010s. I keep an
eye out for when those expectations meet the world, and in what form.

I don’t think the “metaverse” is related – too high fidelity, too corporate.
(The [lo-fi metaverse](/home/2021/12/02/metaverse) would be, if that were
bigger…)

Maybe the “cozyweb” trend? Cozyweb features in [Venkatesh Rao’s 2019 internet
map](https://studio.ribbonfarm.com/p/the-extended-internet-universe) as
collage-y, a cut-and-paste aesthetic; friends hanging out in the corners of
the internet out of the full glare of the indexers. I’ve previously named this
diaspora into sub-Dunbar spaces as [virtual private
neighbourhoods](/home/2021/01/07/dunbar_spaces) and maybe it’s a
recapitulation of the DIY, small-group-social experience of a Minecraft
server. But I’m not 100% convinced.

OR: how about voxels?

_Voxels._ 3D pixels.

In particular: 3D pixels that are chunky enough to see, pick up, and make
things with.

I don’t really care about voxels as an invisible underlying data structure of
3D virtual environments or scans; I do care about voxels that you can see.
Like icons that are meaningful to the human and the computer. Fat voxels like
Lego bricks.

Minecraft players will have imprinted on fat voxels. _I should,_ they will say
to themselves in their deep unconscious, _be able to sculpt the terrain of my
computing environment. It should be obvious how to do that merely from the
aesthetic._

There’s more and more 3D around.

So I look out for signs of voxels in the 2020s.

I haven’t seen much tbh but occasionally there’s something from an unexpected
source.

FOR EXAMPLE:

Charter cities and their foundational law.

Charter cities are semi-autonomous, special administrative zones, carved out
from their host country to run their own legal system and economy, often from
a libertarian perspective.

_CAVEAT: I am intellectually intrigued by the idea! It’s like a philosophical
thought experiment from Ancient Greece or science fiction that people live in.
But morally it’s icky. You never hear of socialist startup societies. [UPDATE:
Of course you do, I was being lazy. I mean in the new charter city movement.]
The narrative is always “freedom” aka let people with existing power/money do
what they want. However: I don’t believe any charter cities actually exist
yet, so it’s ok to speculate about them._

There’s a proposed charter city on an island off the coast of Honduras called
_Próspera._ [Here’s the website.](https://prospera.hn)

What would you do if you were designing a whole legal system from scratch in
the 2020s?

_Well_ – I recommend reading this whole piece: Scott Alexander at Astral Star
Codex did a deep dive on everything published about the new city, and here is
the [Prospectus on
Pr’ospera](https://astralcodexten.substack.com/p/prospectus-on-prospera).

Here’s one small bit that caught my eye.

_Prósperan property is sold in three dimension voxels, eg 1m x 1m x 1m cubes,
which is supposed to solve “air rights” debates once and for all._ The idea
is: imagine I have a house with a nice view of the beach, but my neighbor
right in front of me wants to build a tower that blocks my view. Can he do it?
In the US, the answer is “depends what happens after ten years of lawsuits and
city council meetings”. In Pr’ospera, the answer is “depends who owns the
voxels the tower is going through.”

So if I want to prevent my neighbor from building a tower and blocking my
view, I can buy the air above his house that the tower would have to pass
through; then if my neighbor builds there, he’s trespassing on my property.

Property law today is based on 2D land area maps, with a hodgepodge of rights
to light etc to deal with 3D, and surely that’s partially because -
historically - flat maps are easy to draw? And now we can deal with 3D maybe
properly law can change the fundamentals to think about it differently?

Perhaps.

But I wonder if the folks involved played Minecraft growing up.

Voxels don’t have to look blocky.

[GANcraft by NVIDIA](https://nvlabs.github.io/GANcraft/) (2021): "Unsupervised
3D Neural Rendering of Minecraft Worlds."

Minecraft landscapes auto-transformed into forested hills, lush meadows, and
beaches – check out the videos.

So I imagine a future VR experience that works a bit like this:

I don’t see why it should be any harder than that?

I know there are 3D edit tools that allow precision, but I feel like fine
control is maladaptive in this situation. You want to be able to make
something gorgeous, and easily, _and_ have full creative expression. That’s
what voxels provide, plus the application of AI which - thanks to the prompt -
has all the almost-infinite variety of latent space.

_(How soon? Using[Diffusion Bee](https://diffusionbee.com), the desktop
version of Stable Diffusion, it takes 30 seconds on my M2 Mac to synthesise an
image. So we’re ~8 Moore’s Law doublings away from realtime synthesised video
at 10 inferences per second – I assume we can get to 40fps with non-inference
tweening. 12 years till interactive hallucinatory VR! Gonna be wild. That’s an
upper bound. I’m sure there are many shortcuts and optimisations which will
get us there sooner.)_

Oh: and when you see somebody else’s landscape, you want to be able to see how
they did it, and have it graspable so you can copy it yourself. _Voxels as
View Source._

Dunno feels like VR (and AR, MR) will be a thing in the not too distant
future.

So it’s worth thinking about ways that it can be a read-write medium. The
environments that users make won’t have clean 3D models and precision-placed
curves – instead they’ll be glitchy, piecemeal, ill-fitting, sketched.
Accreted not architected. But they should _also_ be easy and fun and decent
looking and also, somehow, collaboratively constructed. Like playing Lego
together, not working in some kind of prissy 3D Figma.

It would make for a neat, super customisable, multiplayer VR OS.

It strikes me that Minecraft blocks would be a good “language” for future
users to have with the computer, and there’s nascent cultural readiness for
it, and perhaps these fat voxels are somewhat under explored. It would be
worth some R&D spend to figure it out.
