# Do not buy three decades of loo paper, nor depart today for Barnard’s Star

Say you were flying to Barnard’s Star, 6 light years away. Should you set off
today? Or are you better off waiting a century or two for starship technology
to improve and leaving then?

In not-unrelated news: Ben Terrett, friend and appointed Royal Designer for
Industry, recently revealed his fantasy of buying three decades of toilet
paper in one go: "If I won the lottery the first thing I’d do is buy enough
toilet rolls and enough bin liners for the rest of my life."

First let’s think about how many you’d need of the rest of of your life. I’m
47 and the average life expectancy of a UK male is 80 years old. So I’ve got
33 years left to live. (That doesn’t sound like much tbh.)

The average UK household uses 100 toilet rolls a year so that’s 3,300 more
toilet rolls. A hipster toilet roll like Who Gives A Crap costs £1 a roll so
that’s £3,300. …

Maybe we should bite the bullet and do that now. Storage might be a problem.
Hence the lottery win and I could buy a house with a room just for bog roll
and bin bags like the Kardashians or something.

_Also he says" I thought I’d try and get all Matt Webb about this," which is a
red rag to an etc._

Usually I would be in favour of this kind of brave domestic optimisation. (For
years I’ve stacked up my paper post into giant piles and I batch-open every 6
months. It’s way more efficient and I barely ever get sent to collections
nowadays.)

HOWEVER.

Back to Barnard’s Star.

(Barnard’s Star being the traditional destination to consider for speculative
interstellar travel because of the 1978 engineering study, _Project Daedalus,_
[as previously discussed](/home/2022/02/15/daedalus).)

There is something called the **wait equation.**

Current technology would allow us to reach Barnard’s Star in 12,000 years,
setting off today.

Or: wait.

If technology growth is likely to double every 100 years the speed at which
this journey could be made, then, using equation –1, it would seem that a
voyager need only wait 690 years or so to make the journey in 100 years or
less (i.e. at a speed of 6/100 speed of light). In other words, _the star
could be reached in well under a thousand years from now simply by waiting._
Total time to destination is 690 years of wait + 100 years of travel = 790
years.

So don’t leave too early. Not only would it take longer, but early leavers
will become latecomers, behind the wave of progress, those annoying
"historical curiosities, hardly at the forefront of social change … little to
contribute … a thorn in the side of the authorities." _(The anachronauts from
Greg Egan’s[Schild’s Ladder](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Schilds-Ladder-Greg-
Egan/dp/0575082062/), if you’ve read that.)_

But also don’t leave it too late: the journey time will keep dropping, but
decreasingly, and after a certain point progress won’t help you overtake those
who have the head start.

The sweet spot is what the wait equation is for. (It’s heavily dependent on
economic growth rate assumptions.)

See Kennedy (2006) in the refs below. PDF available at that link. Further
discussion at the blog _Centauri Dreams:_ [Barnard’s Star and the ‘Wait
Equation’](https://www.centauri-dreams.org/2006/11/24/barnards-star-and-the-
wait-equation/).

SIMILARLY:

Got a long computer program to run? Why start now?

We show that, in the context of Moore’s Law, overall productivity can be
increased for large enough computations by ‘slacking’ or waiting for some
period of time before purchasing a computer and beginning the calculation.

Gottbrath et al (1999).

That paper via Ethan Mollick on Twitter, who also points out a related theory
that aliens are quiet because they are… hibernating?… waiting for computers to
get better?

In fact, this is basically one of resolutions to the Fermi Paradox: the
Aestivation Hypothesis suggests all the powerful alien civilizations are
merely sleeping between the stars until computing power becomes better.
Ph’nglui mglw’nafh Cthulhu & all that.

The Aestivation Hypothesis!

Sandberg et al (2017). Both papers linked in the references below.

**So, loo paper.**

Imagine stocking up with a lifetime supply in the 1990s and then a few years
later they invent the multi-ply quilted aloe vera rolls – and you can’t get
any because you’ve got a whole room full of the thin scratchy stuff, you’ve
got no room. And you can’t offload any to make room because nobody wants it;
they can get the luxury paper for cheap-enough.

Or what if you’d had the misfortune to stock up in 1997 and [your Kleenex was
illegally embossed with Penrose tiles](/home/2022/05/26/filtered). No
reselling without IP violations.

Toilet paper innovation barrels along. [Less than a century
ago:](https://www.history.com/news/toilet-paper-hygiene-ancient-rome-china)
"by 1930 toilet paper was finally manufactured ‘splinter free.’"

Who only knows what it will be like in another decade or two.

At this point I should calculate the wait equation for loo paper given
technological progress curves and opportunity cost of storage space and the
utility function of wiping your bum and so on. I imagine there’s an optimum
number of years to purchase in advance.

But anyway.

Buy as you go, probably.

_Refs._
