# Old wards and new against fake humans

Somebody’s taken Childish Gambino’s music video [This is
America](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VYOjWnS4cMY) _(original, YouTube)_
and used some AI face-swapper software called FaceFusion to sub in Nicolas
Cage.

[Here’s the result on
X/Twitter.](https://twitter.com/cocktailpeanut/status/1703784764728082677) You
don’t need to watch the whole thing – just the moment at 2m40s where
Cage/Gambino turns his face sideways and the face swap glitches out, back, out
again and sits on Gambino for a beat, then back to Cage looks unnatural,
settings in, then lights up and walks off.

The timing is perfect. [I’ve clipped the video here.](/more/2023/09/gambino-
cage-glitch.mp4)

It seems to me like this is a visual trope we’re going to see more and more?
It’s the paranoia and glitching in _A Scanner Darkly_ (2006), the visual
glitch when your trust in subjective reality is shaken loose. I’m looking
forward to this being a commonplace shorthand for doubt; a quick glitch in a
romcom when somebody is acting out of character, say.

ANYWAY:

It reminds me that AI face swaps are not (in 2023) much good at ears.

[There is a rise in imposter
scams](https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2023/03/05/ai-voice-scam/)
_(Washington Post):_

The man calling Ruth Card sounded just like her grandson Brandon. So when he
said he was in jail, with no wallet or cellphone, and needed cash for bail

…for which you need about 30 seconds of audio and under a hundred bucks.

And so, at least for video calls, [as previously discussed when I posted about
ears last year](/home/2022/11/17/filtered), the advice is this: "To Uncover a
Deepfake Video Call, Ask the Caller to Turn Sideways."

As a family, we have a secret pass phrase to check identity between ourselves
in the event of an unexpected video call.

It’s a sticking plaster solution. Long term I suspect we all need 2FA for
humans.

In the meantime, maybe the most effective ward against deepfakes is simply to
turn sideways?

We should build the habit now. At the beginning of every call, exchange a
quick proof-of-humanity by showing our ears.

**Warding against pretend people: some examples.**

ONE!

The origin of _tao po,_ apparently a common Filipino phrase:

According to historian Ambeth Ocampo, pre-colonial Filipinos used the phrase
to declare themselves as humans, thus: “Tao po ako, hindi aswang!” (_“I am
human and not \_aswang_ “\_)

… evil spirits, _aswang,_ and other dangers that lurked outside the home were
incapable of saying “tao po” to trick you into letting them in your house.

… Today, “tao po” has a more mundane purpose. Depending on the usage, it can
be loosely translated to “anybody home?” or “a person is at the gate.”

TWO!

Haint blue is: "a collection of pale shades of blue-green that are
traditionally used to paint porch ceilings in the Southern United States."

Originally, haint blue was thought by the Gullah to ward haints, or ghosts,
away from the home. The tactic was intended either to mimic the appearance of
the sky, tricking the ghost into passing through, or to mimic the appearance
of water, which ghosts traditionally could not cross. The Gullah would paint
not only the porch, but also doors, window frames, and shutters. Blue glass
bottles were also hung in trees to trap haints and boo hags.

For HTML fans, that’s hex #D1EAEB.

THREE!

Perhaps your baby has been stolen and an ancient fairy has taken its place – a
[changeling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Changeling).

You can trick fey folk into breaking their silence by baffling them.
Typically: [cooking with
eggshells](https://writinginmargins.weebly.com/home/eggshells-and-
changelings).

A fairy doppelganger has posed as a human baby and successfully pulled the
wool over its human hosts’ eyes. However, someone (typically the mother)
realizes what’s happened. To trick the changeling, she uses empty eggshells as
milk pans, stewpots, or brewing cauldrons. The fake infant is so surprised
that he suddenly begins to speak. Sometimes he is startled, sometimes amused.
“I have never seen the like of that before” is the most common exclamation, as
he unthinkingly reveals his great age. Then, in a flash, all is set right and
the real baby is returned.

**What 21st century fake humans do I want to ward off?** What should I carry
with me?

Ok, taking turns to show our ears to watch for deepfake glitches. Like shaking
hands from the old days, demonstrating that I’m not about to draw my sword.

What about if I suspect I’m speaking, in text or voiceswapped, with an AI? The
best trick would be to challenge it to say something obscene. The AI
changeling wouldn’t be able to help itself, blurting in response: "I’m sorry
but as a large language model I cannot…"

_If we’re emailing, and the first words I say to you are utterly beyond the
pale, just like excessively and graphically disturbing, don’t worry, I’m just
helpfully establishing my humanity._

Tao po.

I’m into wards that become unquestioned social habits.

I’m also thinking more about wards that are physical artefacts, and less about
AI…

For instance: my car was stolen recently, evaporated from the street.

Apparently 50% of car thefts in the UK are from hijacking keyless entry.

So now I own a ward against malicious ghost RF: a handsome box, in which I
store my keys.

And so does everyone else it turns out! If you type "far–" into search on
amazon.co.uk, the top two suggestions are:

The third autocomplete:

Don’t get that one. It is unlikely to help.
