# Post at 15.33, on Sunday 16 Jan 2011

[3D facemaking machine for
dolls.](http://www.wonderlandblog.com/wonderland/2011/01/3d-facemaking-
machine-for-dolls.html "Alice Taylor's blog.") It prints photographs onto tiny
moulded doll faces. As Alice says, "Beautifully specific and weird." Brilliant
pictures.

It comes from (where else?) [Zhejiang,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zhejiang "Manufacturing heart of China.") China's captured warp core of industrial
capitalism.

Bruce Sterling, in [Taklamakan,](http://lib.ru/STERLINGB/taklamakan.txt "Full
text!") has a vision of how products could be not invented but generated. Why
not evolve them in virtual worlds then print them out: "you could just set up
a giant high-powered virtuality with a bunch of virtual cans inside it. Then
you make some can-opener simulations, that are basically blobs of goo. They're
simulated goo, but they're also programs, and those programs trade data and
evolve. Whenever they pierce a can, you reward them by making more copies of
them. You're running, like, a million generations of a million different
possible can-openers, all day every day, in a simulated space. [...]"

"Finally, you evolve this super weird, super can-opener that no human being
could ever have invented. Something that no human being could even imagine.
Because it grew like a mushroom in an entire alternate physics. But you have
all the specs for its shape and proportions, right there in the supercomputer.
So to make one inside the real world, you just print it out like a photograph.
And it works! It runs! See? Instant cheap consumer goods."

And then you see the 3D doll face machine, and browse
[Alibaba,](http://www.alibaba.com/ "Too much fun.") where everything's cheap
so long as you buy a thousand of it, and think maybe our way of inventing
things isn't that different.
