# If I got made king of web browsers, here’s what I’d do

It’s hot and it’s lunchtime, so let’s pretend I’m in charge of major global
technical infrastructure!

I wrote about [how I would improve RSS](/home/2020/07/29/improving_rss) the
other day _(because being able to subscribe to text is super neat, but it’s so
arcane compared to smartphone apps)._ And after writing that, it occurred to
me that the problem is wider:

The user experience of the web _itself_ sucks.

It is less pleasant to use a web browser than it is to use apps. But that’s
because the browser-makers [(Google and Apple,
primarily)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usage_share_of_web_browsers) have
silently abdicated their responsibility to make browsing _good._ I get it,
they’re conflicted, they’re also running super profitable app stores.

And also, I guess, because browser-makers tend to be _engineers,_ so they do
engineering-type things like making the browser an app-delivery platform able
to run compiled code. Or fight meaningless user experience battles like hiding
the URL, or hiding View Source – both acts that don’t really help early users
that much, but _definitely_ impede the user path from being a consumer to
being a fully-fledged participant/maker.

You know, and also making humble improvements to the web is unglamorous? It’s
hard to measure. It might never be noticed. It’s probably not going to get you
your next bonus. Perhaps that’s it.

So what would I do? I would focus on

Specifically? Here are three ideas to start, totally off the top of my head.

Or, or, or!

_Move the “home” button and the sitemap into the address bar! Let webpages
have a standard and exciting way to suggest related articles!
Make**Bookmarks** and **History** properly smart (highlight my daily visits,
for example) and add them as folders on my smartphone home screen! Embrace the
trend of personal wikis, and also [hypertext and protocols like
Quotebacks](/home/2020/06/16/quotebacks). More bonkers ideas? I’ve got ‘em:
[Making Senses, a presentation from 2006.](http://interconnected.org/notes/2006/06/reboot8/senses/)_

And then just keep on implementing ideas like that. Find something that sucks.
Make the experience better. Repeat 100 times. In two years, look back and see
how far we’ve come.

Hey, here’s a bonus idea but it’s a tough one: **Google Apps for everything.**
The experience of writing a Google Doc is awesome. Seeing other people’s
cursors, live changes, suggested changes that can be approved/rejected; it’s
robust to dropping offline, there are both anonymous and signed-in users, etc.
This should be something that _any_ website can do. Sites should be able to
identify a user, provide a collection of user handles by whatever method they
choose for the collaborating group, and the browser should do the rest.

What I _don’t_ want is for this to lead to a sameness of the web. [Websites
really are beginning to look the same](https://theconversation.com/yes-
websites-really-are-starting-to-look-more-similar-136484) and that’s a shame.
As [Benedict Evans put it in his
newsletter](https://newsletterest.com/message/23692/Benedicts-Newsletter-
No-336): "maybe this is the same as the way wind tunnel data made all cars
look the same."

Rather: provide optional architectures for websites that are good for site
users and good for site creators too. Make that space. Make it crazy easy to
develop in. Then get out of the way.

There’s probably no immediate commercial reason for this humble kind of work.
But the web is the commons of the internet. Looked after, it’s a renewable
resource of new ideas and approaches that don’t fit prevailing economic models
– and also the one place on the internet that is friendly to history. We
mustn’t lose it.

There are people looking at how to completely change web browsing. How to make
it social. How to including payments, or publishing, or whatever. Brilliant.
Let them. Meanwhile, the web we’ve _got_ is a mess, and we’ll never to these
new ideas if the centre doesn’t hold.

So who’s looking at this? Is there a team in Chrome and a team in Safari
advocating for the experience of the web, _as the web,_ or does this need to
come from somewhere else?
