# A pre-history of weeknotes

_The following was originally posted on the Job Garden blog and has since been
moved here._

Have a look at the title where it says “Week 16”: there’s a format to these
posts. I report and reflect. The format is called _weeknotes._

There’s a decent-sized community of people who keep weeknotes. Check out [Web
of Weeknotes](https://weeknot.es) which brings together a couple dozen
adherents.

I have a few friends whose weeknotes I always look forward to reading. Tom
Armitage does that lovely thing of reporting progress abstractly week by week,
using only project codenames, then revealing when the work ships what the
codename was so you can connect the dots all the way back. [His Week 227 is a
good example](https://tomarmitage.com/2018/04/17/week-277/). With Tom there’s
always the joy/risk that halfway the post goes into a rabbit hole of (as in
this case) soldering microcontrollers and what it feels like when today you
don’t quite have the dexterity. And that kind of perspectival swerve is the
fun of reading weeknotes.

I’m not sure Warren Ellis’ _Orbital Operations_ [(subscribe
here)](http://orbitaloperations.com) counts as weeknotes because it doesn’t
self-identify as such and it’s an email newsletter, but unlike most
newsletters it shares many of the weeknotes qualities: there’s a weekly
rhythm; the spine of each edition is a weekly report of Warren’s work and
observations, rather than following the popular newsletter formats of topic-
driven essays or link lists; you see projects coalesce from Warren’s musings
and interests through to codenames and, later, emerge as comics and Netflix
seasons; you get a crazy privileged insight into whatever he’s reflecting on.
To pick up on that last point, take this snippet from a recent Orbital
Operations email:

I have (checks clock) sixteen days to finish a movie script. This is actually
fine. A thing I learned from John Rogers is to write-over. Each stage of the
job - beat outline, treatment, screenplay - is built on the other. Copy the
rough beat outline into a new document and rewrite and add and expand until
it’s a treatment. Copy the treatment into Final Draft and rewrite and add and
expand until it’s a screenplay. That way, you only start with a blank piece of
paper right at the very start of the process. Every other stage comes with
scaffolding and a base coat. Works for prose and comics too. Try it. Just copy
the previous document into the next one and start rewriting and adapting it.
Might not work for everything, but it might give you a leg up.

Insane. Where else would you hear this kind of report from a ridiculously-
accomplished culture-alchemist? Nowhere else, that’s where.

A third weeknotes-author I look forward to reading is Phil Gyford. [Here’s
Phil’s w/e 8 July
2018](https://www.gyford.com/phil/writing/2018/07/08/weeknotes/) which bounces
between exhibitions attended, and nuggets of things learnt. In this particular
edition (?)/episode (?)/transmission, Phil has made an acting showreel and
summarises the process in seven bullets - hard-won knowledge generously
shared- before ricocheting directly to his uncertainties re his craft:

I’m uncertain about my performance, but we’ll see how it looks. I felt pretty
lost and useless, unable to conjure up the required emotions. Maybe my
preparation hadn’t been right or enough but, ugh, I felt so dry. Nothing
there. An emotionless husk.

(1) Reading: These moments of vulnerability are wonderful to read, and I feel
a sudden and greater personal connection with Phil, in addition to feeling
less isolated in my own moments of uncertainty.

(2) Writing: I know from experience that naming and recording these wobbly
feelings is valuable because, at some point in the not-too-distant, you come
back to your own work and say, “holy shit, that’s amazing, how was I capable
of that,” and then you read the historic weeknotes and realise that _at the
time_ you were miserable about what you are now delighted by, and closing the
loop like that gives you perspective during self-doubt moments in the future.

I always enjoy and appreciate Phil’s sign-offs. In that one: _“I can cry! Wipe
your happy tears, and I hope you have a good week.”_

I wrote the first ever weeknote in August 2009 at BERG and here it is: [Week
217](http://berglondon.com/blog/2009/08/05/week-217/). Like anything new, the
origin is fuzzier than that.

I thought it’d be interesting to start giving a weekly update here of what
we’re up to in the company.

Even in that proto weeknote the format is there already: a little reporting on
the life of the business; a little off-road rambling; a single person’s
individual perspective; a strong feeling of [in medias
res](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/In_medias_res).

These posts continued for years, eventually rotating round the studio so
everyone could (_had_ to…) have a shot in their own particular way. [Timo’s
posterised video Week 335](http://berglondon.com/blog/2011/11/08/week-335/) is
a particular favourite.

Weeknotes weren’t called weeknotes when I wrote that first one.

In September 2009, the following month, [Bryan Boyer started writing weekly
updates](http://web.archive.org/web/20091022153339/http://www.hdl2010.org:80/blog/2009/09/weeknote-029/),
inspired by that first one at BERG, and finally in November [I
noticed](http://berglondon.com/blog/2009/11/10/week-231/) that Bryan had named
them “weeknotes” and so I adopted the tag. A few other studios had also
started writing by then. Bryan created **weeknotes.com** which aggregated
these posts. Now gone, it can be [found in the Wayback
Machine](http://web.archive.org/web/*/weeknotes.com). _([Here’s a
screenshot](/more/2018/07/bryan-boyer-weeknotes.png) from December 2009.)_

And then Russell Davies wrote about weeknotes in his monthly _Wired_ column!
[On the structure of time (May
2010)](http://web.archive.org/web/20110104083044/http://www.wired.co.uk/magazine/archive/2010/06/start/russell-
m-davies-on-the-structure-of-time):

Weeknotes detailed what they were up to that week, what had been going well,
what hadn’t. They were just blog entries, updated weekly, nothing more
remarkable than that. Except they struck a little chord with people - and
other companies and individuals started doing the same thing.

They seem to have a pattern and rhythm that people like. A few paragraphs
about what you’re up to. No need for big insights or revelations, just a bit
of sharing and perhaps a moment of reflection. They fit neatly into that
globally distributed culture of small creative businesses and people.
Individuals and small companies such as these need to share to learn and to
find like-minded partners and employees - the Weeknote matches the rhythms of
their work, and the blog and RSS are the perfect way to deliver it.

RSS! Remember that?

And:

It helps to see that other people struggle with deadlines and clients, that
big projects can fall apart and still get put back together, that finance is
taxing but that this or that software package can help. Above all, it’s nice
to realise that everyone else is also just making it up.

And we still have weeknotes today.

What about _before_ August 2009?

I wrote that first weekly update inspired by a blog post _that Russell had
written_ two months earlier at Newspaper Club (company previously mentioned in
[Week 15](https://medium.com/job-garden/closed-this-week-
week-15-7dc5ea6615e7)) which was down the hall at the time. Here it is, [Week
One.](http://web.archive.org/web/20120928002603/http://blog.newspaperclub.com/2009/06/05/week-
one/) They carried on writing these update posts for a little while, but I
think just for the first chapter of the company.

The transparency and diary format reminded me of (and this is going to sound
slightly weird so apologies for the remainder of this paragraph) [The Worst
Journey in the
World](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Worst_Journey_in_the_World) by Apsley
Cherry-Garrard, being his retelling from his contemporaneous diaries of his
participation in Scott’s 1910 expedition to the Antarctic - often called ill-
fated but reading the book much of it was ill-their-own-bloody-faults - which
I had read not long before, and which I loved for the adventure and tick-tock
unfolding and the meandering thinking-out-loud-ness of it all, and I wanted to
write something with a similar sense of road trip.

Although it wasn’t in my head at the time, I have also always been a fanatic
of [lab books](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lab_notebook) in which you write,
each day, what you’ve been up to in the laboratory, recording experiment
results, musings, and anything else that occurs relevant or ir-. To prevent
retrospective editing, you sign off the pages at the end of each day.

I have a physics background and enjoyed enormously my time in the lab. You
can’t tell, in the middle of an experiment, what will be important. So write
down the millilitres of whatnot and the pitch of the diffraction grating and
the hypothesis you’re chasing down, but also whether you’ve shaved because
there might be [crystal seeds in your
beard](https://www.sheldrake.org/research/morphic-resonance/part-i-mind-
memory-and-archetype-morphic-resonance-and-the-collective-unconscious) and
what the weather is. You don’t know what is important until you’ve had a
chance to look back and reflect.

So that was where that came from. And if nothing else, it demonstrates the
depth of deviousness to which Russell is able to stoop to generate column
fodder.

My habit at BERG, for some years, was to go to the studio on Saturday mornings
and reflect on the week. One of my most rambling, longest, personally-most-
enjoyable weeknotes was [Week
315](http://berglondon.com/blog/2011/06/21/week-315/) and it came from a
morning like that. It’s a series of notes of whatever was on my mind, and
word-sketches about studio life.

Idling: They say dreaming is the brain’s way of processing the day’s events
and emotions. A necessary process of defragmenting, filing, and letting things
come to rest and join up. Idling is a waking dream, time to be with work but
not to be working, to let events and activity settle out and resolve, and let
ideas and strategy take form in an unforced way. A necessary process.

So you’ll read some thoughts about attention and risk, plus a record of what I
had for dinner. A lab book!

I try to keep this weekly space for reflection going even now, though it more
regularly happens on Fridays.

One of my favourite and shortest weeknotes, [Week
243](http://berglondon.com/blog/2010/02/07/week-243/):

This moment, sat on the windowsill with my laptop on my lap, drawing
interfaces and technical architectures in red felt tip pen, cutting paper and
covering walls, writing rules that will govern us for weeks or more to come,
this is the only moment, the legitimacy of kings is written in blood, and this
is the reality of life in Scenario 4.

I’m at home right now. We got back from hols on Sunday and yesterday - mod a
meeting or two - was a write-off. Today I’m writing about the history of
weeknotes in part because there’s no Job Garden software development to
report, and mainly to warm up my fingers after the break.

I was sitting in a caf’e writing and drinking coffee early this morning,
although really it’s much too hot for coffee, and I came home to meet a FedEx
delivery which in the event arrived early but managed to leave its package
anyway, and missed a UPS delivery which I didn’t know was coming and left its
package inconveniently about a kilometre away and I’ll go out to fetch that
later.

I also use private weeknotes.

I have a micro consultancy called [Mwie Ltd](https://www.mwie.com) which
stands for Matt Webb Import/Export but [Alex DS](http://designswarm.com/who/)
has decided is - and this is now canon - pronounced _mais oui._

For the past couple summers I’ve run teams on innovation projects in the
Android team at Google. They got weeknotes.

The startup accelerator I run [(my reflections
here)](http://interconnected.org/home/2018/05/02/reflections-5) at R/GA
Ventures with [Lisa Ritchie](https://twitter.com/lisr) who is program
director: Lisa wrote weeknotes.

The per-project weeknotes are a little more structured, sure, but what I like
about them is they’re not simply a reporting tool. There’s space to bring up
weak signals and also anyone can be added to the distribution list, whether
they’re in the project chain of command or simply an interested party. By
being open about what’s not yet fully baked, and liberal with the subscription
policy, fellow travellers encountered earlier in the project can jump in with
opportunistic assistance.

I’ve not been involved in the public weeknotes scene for some time. It’s grown
and become its own culture which is delightful (though capped by the general
decline in blogging over time, which is a shame but perhaps reversible).

This article, [The why of weeknotes](https://productforthepeople.xyz/the-why-
of-weeknotes-c1cd98967842), captures the motivations well:

Anyway I found these seemingly simple updates a fascinating peak behind the
curtain of a design studio that were generally just doing really interesting
things but also being open as to the how and why of it all. They regularly (at
least early on) were more than status updates and instead provided an
interesting narrative. It was a geek serial.

That’s about reading. The real magic comes in why to write. The article
continues:

most obviously they are an amazing aide memoir

And it also cites (I summarise):

_a regular check intostate of mind; finding, within an organisation, “new
stealth readers in leadership or HR type roles”; sharing problems; providing a
conversation starter._

That last one is a biggie. I think of blogs like a green “available” light on
Skype. I’m here, alive, and ready to chat!

For me, keeping weeknotes while I’m building and thinking about [Job
Garden](https://job.garden), there’s another benefit in that I’m relying on
compound interest to develop this product. I’m not doing much each week, but
if I take a step _every_ week, I should get somewhere. That’s the theory. In
practice, in the middle of events, when you’ve left the near shore and the far
shore is not yet visible, progress can be hard to discern and energy harder to
find. So the passing mile markers of weeknotes give me some kind of
reassurance.

I’m seeing more people starting weeknotes recently: [Public Digital has a
weeknotes category](https://public.digital/category/weeknotes/), started May
of this year. [Better Work Lab is today up to Week 26.](https://www.betterworklab.com/week-notes/) Good.

However the weeknotes format has evolved, I think three qualities endure:

I’ll add a last: **the joy of weeknotes is just as much in the writing as the
reading.** If marketing happens too that’s a happy side-effect.

But honestly, there’s no dogma. Everyone has their own style.

[Have some downtempo new wave synth
pop.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l3VqAsMXE7o)

If you start writing weeknotes because of this post, let me know.

[That’s all. Keep on, I
guess.](https://www.gyford.com/phil/writing/2018/07/01/weeknotes/)
