# Acts Not Facts weeknote #5: Always report null results

This is a tricky week to write up because… there’s nothing unusual going on?

In the experiment of weeknotes, this test that there is always something
interesting to say, this counts as a null result.

Project #1 shipped a website.

Project #2 nailed a strategy.

I got my hands dirty building after a few weeks not doing that and I am
reminded how much energy it brings.

I went to a drinks event and talked to one person who works on machine
learning infra in cell biology and life extension and someone else who works
on the underlying algorithms for petascale databases. We put bets on when we
would see AI sentience for the first time (upper bound: less than 1,000 years.
Lower bound: 1-5 years).

There are four early projects I need to develop and I am behind on all of
them. I have a list.

The work to deliberately build the London scenius is our conspiracy.

In the spirit of transparency:

I am painfully aware that, when I write a post on my blog, it ends up in a
thousand inboxes. And so there is pressure not to be dull. And this null
result is dull? Like, nothing happened!

HOWEVER.

We should love null results because they are our stepping stones to positive
results, and although we might get lucky sometimes, we can’t just decide to
skip that queue.

[Always report null results.](https://www.the100.ci/2017/06/01/why-we-should-
love-null-results/)

Did a talk about design and AI; missed a self-imposed deadline.

Common thread: spinning up processes.

Processes don’t exist except for artefacts (Notion tables and Trello boards)
and habits (recurring meetings in Google Calendar). Also in the [general
intellect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_intellect) of the team.

None of these can be touched directly. So what you do is you speed-run
portions to create muscle memory, nudge parts, and when something happens that
is randomly in the right direction, amplify that by being noisy about it –
organisational change by LARPing a Maxwell’s demon of workplace activity.

Of course everyone else is doing the same. It’s a collaborative effort! I
enjoy it.

None.

Spent Sunday afternoon doing accounts.

**AI Clock.** Got agreement on the changes I need to the core component .
Prices for that will come back soon. _“We will reply to you next week. :) Best
regards.”_ Good good.

Another update, also last week, from another of the production partners:
there’s strong confidence that the product can come in at budget.

It doesn’t matter either way. It’s Thanksgiving in the US which means I have
missed my self-imposed deadline for launching the Kickstarter. It’ll have to
be January now. Colour me disappointed but reconciled.

The internal talk on **design and AI** last week went well. Maybe. It’s hard
to tell over zoom.

As my starting point I took the subtitle from Ted Nelson’s 1974 [Computer
Lib/Dream
Machines](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_Lib/Dream_Machines): "You can
and must understand computers NOW."

Nelson coined the team hypertext and published _Computer Lib_ just 6 years
after Engelbert’s team’s demo of the first personal computer. What if
computers could be used for creativity? said Nelson. So the book is a tumult
of ideas but also explanations of what device peripherals are, and how shift
registers work, and what code looks like, and so on. Demystifying.

Neither is AI is a magical mystery.

The unspoken sense that maybe AI can do anything, and also therefore that
there must be unapproachable complexity, gets in the way of building and
imagining with it.

So my goal was to demystify large language models. The basics rather than,
whoa AI isn’t it amazing.

Demystifying by example:

The _Make Real_ prompt is pretty hilarious:

You are an expert web developer who specializes in building working website
prototypes from low-fidelity wireframes.

Your job is to accept low-fidelity wireframes, then create a working prototype
using HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, and finally send back the results.

The results should be a single HTML file.

…

_You love your designers and want them to be happy._ Incorporating their
feedback and notes and producing working websites makes them happy.

When sent new wireframes, respond ONLY with the contents of the html file.

In the AI world we call that _alignment_ lol.

So that was my part of the talk.

The next step from showing examples is to get your hands dirty.

Rolling your sleeves up is really the only way to build good intuitions.

We didn’t make it all the way to hands-on in the session, but one colleague
did an amazing bit about the value of sketching and other design artefacts,
and then another colleague ran a deft mini-workshop to sketch up AI ideas.
With some great output!

It is daunting maybe, for non-engineers, to unpack AI like this.

But as designers and product people we all have a pretty good working
understanding of, say, what can be done with HTML, or how apps work. The same
level of understanding is needed for large language models and generative AI
generally: not how it works under the hood, but a familiarity with the
material, what you can and can’t do with it at scale, and how to combine
different techniques.

So daunting but necessary.

Monday. My first unaccounted-for day in weeks. Phew. I’m going to the British
Library where I’m going to hang out and sketch in one of the science reading
rooms for old time’s sake. Maybe spelunk the shelves for interesting journals,
c.f. that time I read [every issue of Electrical Review magazine from the
1880s and 1890s](/home/2021/10/06/electricity).

Shelves only. Can’t get anything from the stacks, it turns out the BL was
knocked over in a cyber attack last Friday and the systems are still down.

I had an epiphany last week about what I want _Acts Not Facts_ to become so
that’s what I want to sketch about.

**PartyKit.** After wrapping the new brand and site [Mark
Hurrell](https://thinkm.studio) designed a polyrhythmic drum machine.

So I built it, and you can play here:
**[partycore](https://partycore.labs.partykit.dev/rooms/1999)** – 3 track
natively multiplayer looping step sequencer, always 140bpm. It’s fun.

The PartyKit blog has all the [gory technical
details](https://blog.partykit.io/posts/partycore-140bpm-with-tonejs).

It’s my first time doing audio in the browser (I used Tone.js, neat to have
another tool in the toolbox). And intriguing to think about the layers of
multiplayer interaction: the steps in the drum machine are synced in near
realtime, but the loops play independently for every user.

**Client Who Cannot Be Named** can possibly be named this week sometime, comms
grids willing. I’m a way downstream of a different announcement.

Focus of both this week is product invention + AI. No strategy.

I’m tapping this with my thumbs on the crowded train and a tiny spider just
swam horizontally past my head, an inch from my eyes, apparently on a thread
too delicate to be seen.

I caught myself in a tetchy mood one day last week. Then: shipped something.
Immediately felt better.

_Last week:_

**PartyKit.**

I shipped **Cursor Party** last week. If you’re a web creator, you can copy
this project and get multiplayer cursors on your website inside a minute or
two. There are full instructions. [Here’s the Cursor Party writeup on the
PartyKit blog.](https://blog.partykit.io/posts/cursor-party)

It’s live on this blog too! Try opening two browser windows to this post and
seeing your own cursor.

I added a couple extra easter eggs:

I love playing with ambient togetherness on the web like this.

[Here’s my forked version of Cursor
Party.](https://github.com/genmon/interconnected-cursor-party) lmk if you
build websites and you want a hand getting up and running with this, happy to
help. Or have ideas for other modules to create.

**Client Who Cannot Be Named** still cannot be named. Boo. On the flip side,
the strategy is now baked into team OKRs. That means it’ll happen. We’re
talking about a next phase of that project – excellent.

_Coming up this week:_

I want to ship more code. Let’s see.

It is insane how itchy and irritable I get when there is something I want to
get out in the world, and it is just inches away from getting there. I always
forget.

It’s like… when something is _out,_ whether it’s a public demo or better in
people hands, it can stop living in my head and start being material that I
work with to make the _next_ thing.

(This goes for things I’m making with my own hands or making with other
people.)

And when I’m carrying something half-complete in my imagination… it’s a
weight, it’s a drag.

Speaking of which, my **AI Clock.**

Good progress on several fronts: the production cost is (almost) on budget and
confirmed. We’ve been able to reduce the minimum order quantity to 1,000. I am
working with the amazing [Tom Armitage](https://tomarmitage.com) to build the
firmware for the production board.

Kickstarter in January, exact date TBC. I have lots to do ahead of that.

**SF in February.**

A date for your diary – I literally just booked a week in/around San
Francisco, 4 Feb till 11 Feb 2024.

Lmk if you can sneak me in anywhere to see cool and unlikely things.

Or would be interested in a talk.

Also. I need to stretch my legs and see the horizon. What are the best day
hikes in February within a few hours drive of the city?
