# Post at 17.52, on Wednesday 2 Jan 2008

What I like most about the [Fit Song video by
Cornelius](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7AeodCMHCFk "Stop motion music
awesomeness.") [[thanks](http://www.blackbeltjones.com/work/ "For it was Matt
Jones who sent it to me, in IM.")] is the sugar cube stop motion animation
near the beginning, because it's not just that the sugar cubes are being added
to the chain one by one: there's a signal travelling down the chain, which
means the _entire scene_ iterates frame-by-frame. This reminds me of Yatima
and Paolo, in Greg Egan's
[Diaspora](http://gregegan.customer.netspace.net.au/DIASPORA/DIASPORA.html "Stretches what human is further than you think possible right now."),
attempting to catch up with the Transducer civilisation by chasing successive
subtly varying Transducer-made artifacts through nested 5 dimensional
universes, where each universe is contained within a Planck-sized singularity
hidden in the last. Each artifact looks like a totally non-moving solid, and
it's only after they've passed to the 267,904,176,383,054th universe (with no
way of getting back) that they realise the artifacts were successive
iterations in time of the Transducer civilisation itself, uploaded to a
computer, each of the Transducer's moments stretched to eternity in a given
universe, existing only as a dynamic entity when skipping across them. Imagine
living parallel to time, like that. A stop-motion city: a trillion Londons,
side by side in a great circle around the Earth, iterating by a second each
time, so you can walk from 1pm Oxford Circus to 2pm Covent Garden by crossing
the M25 7,200 times.

(Actually you'd only get 1,460 Londons side by side before you ran out of
planet and got back to where you came from. At a second per iteration, that's
a little over 24 minutes.)

Here are [multiple stencils of a figure, all over a
city](http://www.vkn.lv/index.php?parent=525 "I think Timo first showed me
this, at the first Design Engaged."), that when seen in a certain order become
a stop motion animation of someone walking towards you.

The Fit Song video is by the artist Tsujikawa Koichiro, currently showing at
Tokyo's Mori art museum.

How about making a stop motion [watch](http://www.oobject.com/category/crazy-
japanese-watches/ "Japanese, see, it all connects."). 86,400 watches, side by
side. It'd save on moving parts. Or perhaps a clock that only changes when you
look at it.
