# Sound windows and windows generally actually

Windows let in _light…_ but…

I stayed at a hotel a few years ago which had a sound window.

It was the [Juvet landscape hotel](https://juvet.com/en/) in Norway for a
retreat about AI. (You may recognise the architecture – _Ex Machina_ was shot
there.)

ASIDE:

I was lucky enough to stay in one of the seven wooden cabins. Each faces the
woods and the river with floor to ceiling glass windows, artfully arranged to
have no other cabins in view.

Next to the bed, where the bedside phone would be in a regular hotel, is a
closed hatch in the wall. A small rectangle.

You slide open the plain wooden door. There’s a small ridge on the wall so you
can’t see through it lying down, and no breeze reaches you, but it opens
directly to the outdoors.

Which means, in the dark of night, you can listen to the forest and the water
and the wind.

If the veil were thin, and a small hole tore open to the faerie world, the
world next to this one, and you could hear through, that is what a sound
window is like.

There’s something about putting your ear to the _adjacent-but-unreachable_
which is compelling.

And this is part of the feeling behind ant farms and snow globes perhaps?

And also the feeling behind the magic of television? Which has eroded because
we’ve become accustomed to the other world behind the OLEDs.

BTW: although the appeal of an ant farm is to be able to peer at this
unreachable other world, wouldn’t it be cool to _actually_ travel there?

Like: could we make ant-scale robots and teleoperate them with VR glasses, and
go for walks around ant hills? Wouldn’t it be fun to cosplay an ant for a few
hours?

Sound windows and telepresence!

If I were YouTube, I would lean into ambient live streams (I keep a window
open to a waterhole in the Namib Desert, [as previously
discussed](/home/2022/10/21/ca), and it is gorgeous). You could develop an
amazing multiplayer experience around that.

_(Hey and if you’re at YouTube, or you’re a brand and you want to do this -
like the ambient sounds of a factory floor would be incredible, or an HD
stream of the glacier where your water comes from - then get in touch and
we’ll build it.)_

But what makes for a good window anyhow?

I’m part of a small reading group going through _A Pattern Language_ one
pattern at a time. I had read a few patterns, and found them incredible useful
in [designing multiplayer software](/home/2022/01/21/social_gradient), but
never the whole thing. We meet on Mondays and will finish all 253 sometime at
the back end of 2027.

Yeah so we’ve been talking about windows recently.

This paper was cited in APL (pattern #192: Windows Overlooking Life): _The
Function of Windows – A reappraisal_ (1967). Full ref below.

The basis being that: "Traditional criteria for window design relate to
daylight and ventilation requirements." However it’s worth looking beyond
that?

This grabbed me: that a window, on the retina, is **visually dynamic and
interactive.**

Another criterion for successful window design might be a dynamic one – i.e.
_the amount of change in the view that takes place for a given change in the
viewing position of the observer._ As a result of this movement parallax not
only do objects at a different distance within the view change their relative
position but also the window-view relationship changes.

This is why two-dimensional artificial windows, even when very carefully
contrived, are unrealistic and soon cease to satisfy; they lack ‘depth’ within
the view and the parallax of window aperture-view is also absent. For small
movements in a horizontal plane, such as occur when walking a few steps, a
vertically orientated window with an axis at right angles to the plane of
movement gives a maximum rate of change – a long horizontal window under the
same conditions merely changes at its two extremities.

Which as an observation feels PROFOUND somehow!

A window is a continuously changing texture, like a television, but not
because the outside view is changing (though it may) but because of
_parallax._ This means that narrow windows are better than big ones.

Also it is responsive - when you move, the view moves! When you are still… it
is still.

I hadn’t thought about windows like that. So _active._

_Refs._

Markus, T. A. (1967). [The function of windows – A
reappraisal.](<https://doi.org/10.1016/0007-3628(67)yy90012-6>) _Building
Science, 2_(2), 97-121. https://doi.org/10.1016/0007-3628(67)90012-6

I want to make an electronic sound window for my home office, but a window
that looks into cyberspace or latent space, with this reactive parallax
quality to it.

Yeah I don’t know what that means either. It’s kinda a brief to myself I
guess, something to sketch around.
