# Animal Crossing and games as wish fulfilment

Like a bunch of people, I’m playing **Animal Crossing** a bunch. The release
of Animal Crossing simultaneously with the lockdown is like this perfect storm
of “world with global pandemic where you can’t go outside” meets “world with
no global pandemic and you _can_ go outside”, and this has created a number of
Hot Takes.

I am OBSESSED with Animal Crossing btw and I’m not going to explain how it
works here so for that you can [read my post from 2006 about it
instead](http://interconnected.org/home/2006/01/28/i_am_genmon).

Oh god okay, one hot take: [The Atlantic did a thing on Animal
Crossing](https://www.theatlantic.com/family/archive/2020/04/animal-crossing-
isnt-escapist-its-political/610012/) which is pretty good reading actually but
I don’t agree. Their take:

Dunno. Good article though.

[Here’s little Genmon with a
tetrapod.](https://www.instagram.com/p/B-_36liJO7i/) I’ve been building them
on the beach. Tetrapods are those big concrete forms that slow down coastal
erosion.

It’s funny (but sad) because of course there is no coastal erosion in Animal
Crossing.

BUT?

Go [read this Twitter thread by Everest
Pipkin](https://twitter.com/everestpipkin/status/1252788915083399173?s=20) who
has been digging and sculpting and gardening their Animal Crossing island in
order to introduce a river delta, and swampy bits, and rivulet waterfalls from
a mountain – as if the island had geological history apart from Pipkin – and
high mountain meadows and canyon narrows and MY GOD IT’S BEAUTIFUL, Animal
Crossing doesn’t need to be about any more than this.

It’s pretty. It’s nice to spend time there.

For what it’s worth, I think of games a bit like dreams.

There’s a bit in Freud’s _Introductory Lectures_ where he talks about
children’s dreams as being wish fulfilment: doing while asleep what can’t be
done awake.

And I’ve noticed over the years that I tend to gravitate towards games that
let me succeed, in a microscopic contained way, at a task that I’m struggling
with at work (or in life, but let’s not think about that too much as it’ll
just get a bit revealoing and awkward). Not all games, but those popcorn-style
satisfying smartphone games in particular. Like, a game will match up with my
workaday focus of plate spinning, or aligning timings, or barrelling through a
project by sheer force of will – it varies – and let me succeed at it.

Now, the question:

Dunno.

But it’s why I don’t see Animal Crossing as escapism. It’s not escaping from
anything, it’s just what I’m doing what I want to be doing anyway but in a
different context. And maybe one of the reasons the game is popular with so
many people is that there are many different pathways players can take through
it, and none of them is blessed as _the way_ to win.

Previously to Animal Crossing, I have also

It’s a convoluted way to listen to cheesy 80s music, but, like I said,
_hours._

It’s only writing this that I realise how much of it is about music.

Anyway, that’s how I enjoy games.

So there’s a character in Animal Crossing called KK Slider who is a pop star
but sings, like all AC characters, in the gabble-gabble in-game language. And
somebody on Twitter earlier shared a YouTube of [KK Slider doing Africa by
Toto](https://youtu.be/pV0EutH9F9M) which kind of brings everything together,
so I’ll wrap up there.
