# Work update a.k.a. how I’m keeping myself out of trouble rn

It’s been six months since [I posted hunting for
projects](/home/2023/01/12/next) so here’s what happened next.

What happened just after I posted in January was that the AI thing absolutely
blew up. And this is my favourite point in the technology S-curve: we’re
imagination bottlenecked.

Like, for the past 10 years, you mainly had to figure out the _business-
efficient_ path to get to wherever it is you wanted to go. Which means
strategy decks, and post-its, and tests and iterations, and defined team
roles. Which I’ve done my fair share of.

But now!

At this point in the S-curve the way you figure out what to do is that you get
your hands dirty and make things, and you try stuff out in your [sweaty
palm](/home/2006/07/28/about_making_things) which tells you more, and it all
changes daily, and you talk widely and share widely to (a) make sure you’re
not doing anything stupid and/or dangerous, and (b) generate more ideas in the
scenius.

So I have a new product invention studio to help startups and big orgs in
their we-need-to-figure-it-out mode. It’s just me for the moment and I hope to
find projects that will allow me to bring in others.

The studio is called **[Acts Not Facts](https://www.actsnotfacts.com)** and
right there on the homepage is a big Venn of my favourite areas:

Hey and I’ve written up [a bunch of past
projects](https://www.actsnotfacts.com/made).

Now, I’m a believer in _“process”…_ not least because it’s scalable and
embodies the culture of a studio…

…but I think tech and also agency work has changed too much to rely on the
processes of the past. So one of the early goals of _Acts Not Facts_ is to
draft a new playbook. Which means being very open with regards to ways of
working – the work comes first.

I’m super excited about the first public project, starting this week.

[PartyKit](https://partykit.io) is a crazy simple, crazy powerful platform for
multiplayer software. It’s early - as early as any project with [over 2,000
stars on GitHub can be](https://github.com/partykit/partykit/) \- and, to my
mind, future fundamental internet infrastructure. (It’s exactly what I’ve
needed in _many_ projects spanning back years.)

I’ve been noodling with multiplayer interactions for a while. [Here’s a map of
my blog posts about designing for multiplayer](/home/2022/11/09/map). And my
[multiplayer UI sketchbook is over
here](https://www.actsnotfacts.com/made/multiplayer) (being: a whole bunch of
GIFs that I previously shared on Twitter).

So the project with PartyKit is to do, well, _more of that._

The idea is to take part in the collaborative imagining of what multiplayer
can be, hopefully expanding the field – there are tons of smart people already
working in this space, so let’s be part of that open conversation.

And, by being embedded, helping to stretch and inform the development of the
platform API itself.

We’re calling this a residency, which is awesome.

Oh, and!

Part of the remit is collabs.

So if you want to make something together, like figuring out the tricky
interactions with AI agents in multiplayer environments, or exploring weird
cool art, then please do get in touch: [my unoffice door is
open](/home/2020/09/24/unoffice_hours).

It wouldn’t be a studio without a side project to bring a connected hardware
product into the world…

Remember my _AI Clock?_

It tells the time with a new ChatGPT poem every minute on an e-ink screen,
with a curiously enthusiastic vibe. Then [that
tweet](https://twitter.com/genmon/status/1636698753007603713) of the prototype
went crazy, and it ended up in the _New York Times_ and _The Verge_ and also
viral in newspapers in India and ALSO also it showed up in _Private Eye._

WELL.

See the photo of the new P2 prototype, get the details on all this news, and
follow along as the Kickstarter comes together by [reading the latest update
on Substack](https://aiclock.substack.com/p/update-3-gearing-up-for-a-
kickstarter) – please do subscribe.

_(In particular, from the Asks section at the bottom of that update, I’d love
to hear requests for topics to cover in future newsletter editions, and to
talk with anyone in a position to commit to 100+ units and how we might make
that interesting.)_

My dance card isn’t quite full and I am always up for interesting chats about
speculative things and future possibilities. [Contact deets are on my
homepage.](/)
