# Xenia: the ancient Greek norm of guest-friendship

I’m slowly working my way through Emily Wilson’s wonderfully accessible
translation of Homer’s _The Odyssey._ [Here’s a review by poet Tate
Standage](https://ypn.poetrysociety.org.uk/features/tate-standage-reviews-the-
odyssey/): "I feel any review of Emily Wilson’s Odyssey that didn’t mention
the introduction would be as incomplete as the translation itself would be
without it."

The introduction takes a dive into the culture and norms of ancient Greece.
It’s excellent.

In particular, _xenia_ stuck in my head. From Wilson’s intro (p23 of my
edition):

Hospitality is important in all human cultures, ancient and modern; in this
respect, there is nothing special about archaic Greece. What is distinctive
about the customs surrounding hospitality in this culture is that elite men
who have entered one another’s homes and have been entertained appropriately
are understood to have create a bond of “guest-friendship” (_xenia_) between
their households that will continue into future generations. Guest-friendship
is different from _philia_ , the friendship, affection, love, and loyalty that
connects a person to his or her family members and neighborhood friends. It is
created not by proximity and friendship, but by a set of behaviors that create
bonds between people who are geographically distance from each other.

Wilson refers to the "norms and expectations" of _xenia._ One of the ways I
think of a “norm,” to try to get inside the head of one of these ancient
Greeks, is to remember that norms are social reals that are mostly never
questioned, it never even _occurs_ to people to question them, they’re taken
as given, as actual as gravity and rocks.

(But norms _can_ be violated, and then the retaliatory norm is to punish…
Wilson sees _The Odyssey_ through this lens: "The poem’s episodes can be seen
as a sequence of case studies in the concept of _xenia._")

And:

_Xenia_ acquired an extra importance in the era when Greek men were expanding
their world. Travelers, in an era before money, hotels, or public
transportation, had to rely on the munificence of strangers to find food and
lodging and aid with their onward journey.

Before money!

Money feels very real today, as real as gravity. It’s provocative to think of
money itself as a replacement technology, the codified version of the ancient
“remote friendship” norm, thousands of years on, _xenia 2.0._
