# Post at 09.13, on Tuesday 1 Feb 2011

On my way into work this morning (a seven minute walk), I saw two contractors
painting the yellow lines on the side of the road. I hadn't realised they did
it like this: they have a big roll of what looks like yellow ribbon. They cut
long strips of ribbon and place it on the road. The ribbon looks like
rubberised paint. Then they melt it with a [flame
torch,](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Road_markings_-_Hot_tape.jpeg "Somebody putting down road markings.") and it becomes road marking! Simple
straight lines and no spilled paint. Easier all round I guess.

_Also_ on my way into work, I let someone know their bag was dripping. Sucky
for them, but for me it means my good deed for the day is done by 8.30 am, so
I can really stick the boot in for the rest of Tuesday. Reading around about
good deeds, it turns out that, yes, "people who did one good deed were less
likely to do another good deed in the near future. They had, quite literally,
done their good deed for the day." \-- from [this article about good deeds and
psychology.](http://lesswrong.com/lw/1d9/doing_your_good_deed_for_the_day/ "Cracking article, well written.")

There are a few nice [tit-bits](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tit-Bits "The
original blog, from 1881.") in the piece, including the anecdote that "people
having lunch after church tend to abuse the waitstaff and tip poorly," and
this observation on the finding that one good deed means you needn't bother
about another:

"This meshes nicely with a self-signalling conception of morality. If part of
the point of behaving morally is to convince yourself that you're a good
person, then once you're convinced, behaving morally loses a lot of its
value."

Self-signalling! I wonder how much behaviour is driven by the satisfaction you
get when your observations of self match up with your desired positive traits.
Yes, I suppose I _am_ the kind of person that gives to charity. Yes, I suppose
I _am_ the kind of person that keeps a tidy house. Etc. And how dangerous that
feedback loop is when you're reinforcing negative behaviour. Sigh, I suppose I
_am_ the kind of person who has no willpower.

Which, in a really prosaic way, makes me think about keeping a to-do list.
Saying you'll do something, _and then doing it!_ That's a good feeling
alright.
