# Ze Frank on ugly

[Ze Frank’s 2006 defence of ugly MySpace
pages](http://www.zefrank.com/thewiki/the_show:_07-14-06) as markers of mass
experimentation and the democratisation of design:

For a very long time, taste and artistic training have been things that only a
small number of people have been able to develop. Only a few people could
afford to participate in the production of many types of media. Raw materials
like pigments were expensive; same with tools like printing presses; even as
late as 1963 it cost Charles Peignot over $600,000 to create and cut a single
font family.

The small number of people who had access to these tools and resources created
rules about what was good taste or bad taste. These designers started giving
each other awards and the rules they followed became even more specific. All
sorts of stuff about grids and sizes and color combinations - lots of stuff
that the consumers of this media never consciously noticed. Over the last 20
years, however, the cost of tools related to the authorship of media has
plummeted. For very little money, anyone can create and distribute things like
newsletters, or videos, or bad-ass tunes about “ugly.”

Suddenly consumers are learning the language of these authorship tools. The
fact that tons of people know names of fonts like Helvetica is weird! And when
people start learning something new, they perceive the world around them
differently. If you start learning how to play the guitar, suddenly the guitar
stands out in all the music you listen to. For example, throughout most of the
history of movies, the audience didn’t really understand what a craft editing
was. Now, as more and more people have access to things like iMovie, they
begin to understand the manipulative power of editing. Watching reality TV
almost becomes like a game as you try to second-guess how the editor is trying
to manipulate you.

As people start learning and experimenting with these languages authorship,
they don’t necessarily follow the rules of good taste. This scares the shit
out of designers.

In Myspace, millions of people have opted out of pre-made templates that
“work” in exchange for ugly. Ugly when compared to pre-existing notions of
taste is a bummer. But ugly as a representation of mass experimentation and
learning is pretty damn cool.

Regardless of what you might think, the actions you take to make your Myspace
page ugly are pretty sophisticated. Over time as consumer-created media
engulfs the other kind, it’s possible that completely new norms develop around
the notions of talent and artistic ability.

[Here’s the
video.](http://www.zefrank.com/theshow/archives/2006/07/071406.html)
